This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been 
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to 
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 
10.1111/ACPS.13249
 This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
MR KRISTOFFER ANDREAS AAMODT ANDERSEN (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-9313-4459)
DR DAVID  ERRITZOE (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-7022-6211)
Article type      : Systematic Review or Meta-analysis
Corresponding Author Email ID:  d.erritzoe@imperial.ac.uk
Title:
Therapeutic effects of classic serotonergic psychedelics: A systematic 
review of modern-era clinical studies.
Kristoffer A. A. Andersen1,2), Robin Carhart-Harris1), David J. Nutt2), David Erritzoe 1,2) 
1) Centre for Psychedelic Research, Division of Psychiatry, Imperial College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
2) Centre for Neuropsychopharmacology, Division of Psychiatry, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
Short title:
Review of modern-era psychedelic therapy trials
ABSTRACT
Objective: To conduct a systematic review of modern-era (post-millennium) clinical studies 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
assessing the therapeutic effects of serotonergic psychedelics drugs for mental health conditions. 
Although the main focus was on efficacy and safety, study characteristics, duration of 
antidepressants effects across studies, and the role of the subjective drug experiences were also 
reviewed and presented. 
Method: A systematic literature search (1st Jan 2000 to 1st May 2020) was conducted in Pubmed 
and Psychinfo for studies of patients undergoing treatment with a serotonergic psychedelic. 
Results: Data from 16 papers, representing 10 independent psychedelic-assisted therapy trials 
(psilocybin=7, ayahuasca = 2, LSD=1) were extracted, presented in figures and tables, and 
narratively synthesized and discussed. Across these studies, a total of 188 patients suffering either 
anxiety and/or depressive symptoms associated with cancer (C-RPD), major depressive disorder 
(MDD), obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) or substance use disorder (SUD) were included. 
The reviewed studies established feasibility and evidence of safety, alongside promising early data 
of efficacy in the treatment of depression, anxiety, OCD, and tobacco and alcohol use disorders. 
For a majority of patients, the therapeutic effects appeared to be long-lasting (weeks-months) after 
only 1 to 3 treatment session(s). All studies were conducted in line with guidelines for the safe 
conduct of psychedelic therapy and no severe adverse events were reported. 
Conclusion: The resurrection of clinical psychedelic research provides early evidence for 
treatment efficacy and safety for a range of psychiatric conditions, and constitutes an exciting new 
treatment avenue in a health area with major unmet needs.
Keywords: psychedelic, LSD, ayahuasca, DMT, psilocybin, 5HT, serotonergic.
Summations

Promising early support for therapeutic effects of psychedelic compounds as adjunct 
to psychotherapy for mood disorders and addictions.  

Apparent long-lasting effects for weeks/months after single interventions.

The nature of the psychedelic experience is in most studies predictive of mid-term 
and long-term treatment outcomes. 
Limitations.

Despite the promising efficacy and safety results presented in this review, evidence 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
for psychedelic therapy is to be considered preliminary at this stage.

Additional evidence from ongoing and future larger-scale controlled studies using 
placebo or comparator conditions and/or multiple doses will allow for firmer 
conclusions about both efficacy and safety.
Data availability statement:
Data sharing is not relevant for this article, as no new data were created or analyzed in this article. 
Conflict of interest: The author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: D Nutt is advisor at Compass 
Pathways and AWAKN Life Sciences. R Carhart-Harris is advisor at Entheon Biomedical, Small 
Pharma and Synthesis Institute. D Erritzoe is advisor at Field Trip Health And Small Pharma. K 
Andersen is director at the Norwegian Association for Psychedelic Science (NFPV). 
INTRODUCTION
Inspired by early reports on the unique subjective effects of lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD) in the late 1940s - early 1950s, psychedelic compounds became widely used among 
psychologists and psychiatrists in both research and clinical practice in the 1950-60s. In total, an 
estimate of more than 40.000 patients underwent “psychedelic psychotherapy” over a period of 
about 15-20 years, and by 1961 over 1000 papers had been published on the clinical science of 
LSD, psilocybin, DMT and mescaline 1.  
Psychedelics were initially tested in a series of studies comparing their acute effects to the 
symptoms of schizophrenia, later creating the rationale for a biochemical theory on model 
psychosis 2,3. However, the most significant aspect of the psychedelic research in that period was 
on these compounds’ therapeutic potential. Studies were carried out for a range of psychiatric 
indications, hereunder in patients suffering chronic alcoholism 4-15, obsessive neurosis 16-19, 
chronic pain 20, opioid dependence 21, and anxiety associated with cancer 22. 
A recent meta-analysis of such early studies of LSD’s therapeutic efficacy for treatment of 
alcoholism included data from more than 500 participants, and found evidence for a beneficial 
effect of LSD on alcohol misuse 23. Another recent systematic review of 19 studies of psychedelic 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
therapy for unipolar mood disorders carried out between 1949 and 1973 reported that 79% showed 
clinician-judged improvement on depressive symptoms after treatment with a psychedelic 24. 
Although some studies were of relatively high scientific quality in this period, most did not live up 
to today’s standards in psychological and pharmacological research. Typically, researchers did not 
pay the same stringent attention to patient screening/inclusion, control groups/conditions, blinding 
procedures, standardized and continuous clinical assessments, assessment of side-effects - limiting 
the potential for firm conclusions on the clinical efficacy and safety of this form of therapy 24. 
However, popular and countercultural movements increasingly embraced psychedelics 
during this period, and in combination with some examples of controversial psychedelic science 
being carried out 25,26, this eventually led to legislations that put an end to this period of early 
psychedelic research. In addition, it has also been suggested that the introduction of novel 
conventions about how to conduct state of the art randomized clinical trials, exemplified by the 
“1962 Drug Efficacy Amendment" to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act in the US, might 
have played a role in the field’s downfall 27. The emphasis on context, or “setting”, when 
conducting psychedelic therapy made it hard to subjugate this therapy to a model mainly aimed for 
trialing new pharmaceuticals where the focus was on a ‘pure’ pharmacological action. Studies that 
neglected a therapeutic setting and support  generally failed to produce the same positive outcomes 
27. After the main drug provider stopped manufacture and psychedelics were placed in Schedule 1 
of the 1970’s controlled substance act in the United States 28,29, psychedelic research was 
effectively ended. 
However, over the last couple of decades, a renewed interest in the classic serotonergic 
psychedelic compounds has emerged from different scientific fields. Neuroscientists currently 
apply modern brain imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography (PET) 30-33, single 
photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) 34,35, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)36,37 38,39, 
electroencephalogram (EEG)40 41, and magnetoencephalography (MEG) 36  to the study of these 
drugs in the lab, allowing for new and valuable understandings about their brain mechanisms 
including neuro-correlates of their unique psychological effects. 
Outside the lab setting, this research is supplemented by naturalistic studies into the impact 
of the recreational use of psychedelics. Thus, large-scale epidemiological studies in 100,000+ 
individuals have reported that past psychedelic use is associated with reduced recent psychological 
distress and suicidality 42,43. Naturalistic prospective studies in users of the psychedelic brew, 
ayahuasca (that has n,n-DMT as its active psychedelic), in religious contexts support these 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
findings; with first time users showing acute reductions in minor psychiatric distress 44, as well as 
reductions in personality measures of harm avoidance and reward dependence at six months 
follow-up 45, and more recent prospective surveys have consolidated evidence for improvements 
in mental-health outcomes with psychedelic use, also identifying important ‘contextual’ predictors 
of response46. Long-term ayahuasca use has further been associated with enhanced neurocognitive 
functioning and mood and with reduced impulsivity 47. However, cases of serious adverse events 
such as manic and psychotic reactions in some ceremonial users of ayahuasca have been 
documented 48.
Lastly, experimental studies in healthy psychedelic naïve human volunteers, using single 
administration(s) of classic psychedelics in a controlled and supported setting, have shown 
improvements in psychological well-being 49 above active placebo, as well as increases in 
measures of personality trait, ‘openness to experience’ 50. Intriguingly, these outcomes appear to 
last for several months - much longer than the pharmacological presence of the actual compounds 
– with DMT, psilocybin and LSD all having half-lives of less than 4 hours 51-53. More recently, 
researchers have re-targeted intervention with psychedelics towards clinical populations, mainly 
for treatment of depression, anxiety and addiction 54. Typically, psychedelic-assisted therapy 
involves only one single (or a couple of) session(s) with administration of a moderate to high dose 
of a psychedelic compound with the aim to evoke peak 53 or mystical-type 55 experiences, 
characterized by profound meaningfulness, connectedness 56, accompanied by a sense of oneness 
or unity 49,57. 
Aims of the study
The aim of this systematic review is to collate the literature and provide an overview of the 
new (post-millennium) wave of clinical studies on the therapeutic effects of serotonergic 
hallucinogenic drugs in treatment of psychiatric disorders. Specifically, this article will focus on 
preliminary evidence for the efficacy and safety of these treatments, the duration of their effects, 
and the role of the subjective psychedelic experience.
METHODS
Search 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
The Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis guidelines (PRISMA) served as guiding 
principles for the data collection for this review. A systematic literature search was performed 
using PubMed and PsychINFO databases and was restricted to studies published in English 
between January 1st 2000 and May 1st 2020. The start of the search period was informed by 
previous literature reviews that were not able to identify any clinical research trials published 
between 1982-2000 58,59. The search was conducted with the following search string: 
“schizophrenia OR OCD OR cancer OR anxiety OR depression OR PTSD OR substance use OR 
addiction AND (Psilocybin OR DMT OR LSD OR Mescaline OR Ayahuasca) AND treatment”. 
The search words were identical in both databases, however syntax was modified to meet 
requirements of the individual databases. 
Eligibility criteria 
Both single-blind and double-blind placebo-controlled randomized trials, open label trials, 
and proof of concept trials in mental health patient populations were included. Additional follow-
up papers providing long-term data of the clinical trials were also included. Only articles 
published in peer-reviewed journals were included in the systematic search. Case reports, 
observational studies and cross-sectional studies were not included. 
Participants
Adult patients (18 years +) with a psychiatric disorder diagnosed by their general 
practitioner and/or by structured clinical interview based on DSM or ICD criteria. 
Interventions
Trials included in the review are limited to those administering one or more doses of a 
classic serotonergic psychedelic drug in a controlled lab-setting. The term “classic serotonergic 
psychedelic drug” covers the four drugs; Psilocybin, LSD, Ayahuasca (n,n-DMT) and Mescaline. 
Outcome measures
Only studies assessing primary outcomes using reliable and validated self-report and/or 
clinician administered symptom rating scales were included.
Data extraction
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
All non-duplicated studies were screened by two authors (KA and DE). From each 
included trial the following data was extracted: (1) year of publication and names of authors; (2) 
psychiatric exclusion criteria; (3) Participant characteristics (age, ethnicity, gender, diagnosis, 
previous exposure to drug, and sample size); (4) type of study design (including randomization, 
blinding, experimental condition groups); (5) type of pharmacological intervention (including 
type, comparator, dose, frequency); (6) type of non-drug intervention (including description of 
psychotherapeutic/psychosocial intervention, frequency and total hours); (7) type of clinical 
outcome measure (including level of clinical response, clinical remission, symptom reduction and 
length of follow up); (8) Assessment of the participants subjective experience during drug effects 
(including type of instrument used and potential correlations with clinical outcome data); (9) type 
of side-effect measure/collection method (including number of reported side effects).
RESULTS
Study selection
The systematic search identified 671 references. Fourteen references automatically 
identified as duplicates (Endnote X9). 657 references were screened based on titles and abstracts, 
641 records were excluded in screening, leaving 16 potential research papers. Full text reports of 
the 16 identified research papers were assessed according to eligibility criteria. All 16 are included 
in this systematic review, ten of these papers represent unique clinical trials with oral 
administration of serotonergic psychedelics; seven trials on psilocybin 60-66 two trials on 
DMT/Ayahuasca 67,68 and one trial on LSD 69. Two recent papers 35,70 provided additional 
participants and data to their original trials 64,68. Outcome data was only extracted from the most 
recent trials; however, procedures and trial designs were extracted from one or both (including 
supplementary files). Three papers are pure follow-up studies on the same original trial samples 71-
73.
Heterogeneity 
Due to strong heterogeneity between the trials (trial designs, frequency of drug 
administration, drug type and patient populations) a quantitative meta-analysis of the included 
trials was deemed inappropriate. Two trials, both investigating psilocybin for cancer related 
anxiety and depression65,66, are however quite similar, but due to missing descriptive statistics 
(standard deviation and confidence intervals), a meta-analysis of these two trials were not 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
performed. Instead the extracted data were synthesized narratively. Data from the ten trials are 
presented in text and synthesized to table form grouped into three broad diagnostic categories; 
Mood and anxiety disorders (n=4), cancer related anxiety and depression disorders (n=4), and 
substance use disorders (n=2), these are listed in table 1, 2 and 3, respectively. 
Study characteristics
The included trials covers five different diagnostic groups; cancer related anxiety and 
depression disorders 61,65,66 [C-RADD], illness-related anxiety and depression disorders 69 [I-
RADD), depressive disorders 35,64, obsessive compulsive disorder 60 [OCD], and substance use 
disorders 63,74 [SUD]. Four trials 67,72,75,76 used a randomized, placebo (including active placebo) 
controlled, crossover design, allowing for both comparison of the placebo versus active drug 
effects as well as , and pre-post analyses of the collapsed groups (including crossover subjects) 
from baseline to follow-up. Four trials 35,64,74,77 were open label allowing for within-group pre-post 
treatment analyses only. One trial 60 utilized a pre/post-test design, with a randomized order of 
drug dose administration, however, it provided no comparison between groups. Another trial 78 
was designed as a randomized controlled trial, however it provided no data of the between-group 
comparison, thus it was treated in this review as an open label trial. Six trials were conducted in 
USA, two trials were conducted in Brazil, one in the UK and one in Switzerland. A total of 201 
patients were studied (89 with C-RADD, 12 with I-RADD, 66 with depression, 25 with SUD, 9 
with OCD). A total of 188 patients (95 female) received at least one active dose of a serotonergic 
psychedelic drug (327 unique dosages, 264 active doses, and 63 very low/ active placebo doses). 
Inactive placebos were administered to 54 participants, with 39 of these also receiving a 
psychedelic due to crossover trial designs. Supplementary table 4 presents trial characteristics; 
including participant characteristics, trial design, pharmacological and psychosocial interventions, 
and employed clinical outcome measure. Psychiatric exclusion criteria for each trial are listed in 
suppl. table 5.
Non-drug psychotherapy interventions 
The psychotherapeutic interventions outside the psychedelic session day varied both in 
quantity and type. Two trials, one investigating psilocybin for C-RADD and one LSD for I-RADD 
65,69 both delivered integrative psychotherapy, e.g. integrating aspects from humanistic, existential, 
psychodynamic, body-awareness, mindfulness and cognitive behavioral therapy. In the psilocybin 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
for smoking cessation trial74 cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) was delivered. In the other 
substance abuse trial in which psilocybin was tested for alcohol dependence 63, both CBT and 
motivational enhancement therapy were employed. Three trials (psilocybin for I-RADD, TR-D, 
and C-RADD) 61,64,66 provided structured sessions, defined as psychosocial interventions in suppl. 
table 6, prior to and following the psychedelic sessions, with focus on building rapport, preparing 
for, and debriefing/reflecting on, the psychedelic experience. They did however not explicitly state 
information regarding type of therapy provided thus providing uncertainty about the content of 
these sessions. Three trials (psilocybin for OCD, and two trials testing ayahuasca for 
depression)35,60,67 did not provide any sort of psychotherapy or psychosocial interventions to their 
participants. A vote counting table was created to present individual trial variables related to 
procedures and psychosocial/psychotherapeutic interventions (table 6 in supplementary).
Depression rating scales
Across the included papers, depression was measured with the following scales: Beck’s 
depression inventory [BDI] 79, Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale [MADRS] 80, 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale [HAM-D] 81, GRID Hamilton depression rating scale 17 
[GRID-HAM-D-17] 82, Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale [SHAPS] 83, Quick inventory of 
depressive symptomatology self-report [QIDS-SR] 84, Profile of Mood States [POMS] 85, and the 
depression subscale of the Hospital Anxiety and depression Scale [HADS-D] 86. BDI, QIDS-SR, 
POMS, SHAPS and HADS-D are self-rated measures of depression, while MADRS, HAM-D and 
GRID-HAM-D-17 are clinician administered.
Anxiety rating scales
Measures of anxiety was collected using Spielberger’s State-trait Anxiety Index [STAI-T 
& STAI-S] 87, anxiety subscale of the Hospital Anxiety Depression Scale [HADS-A] 86 and 
Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale [HAM-A] 88. STAI-T, STAI-S and HADS-A are patient rated 
measures, while the HAM-A is a clinician rated instrument.
Substance use assessments
Measurements of treatment outcome related to substance use/dependence disorders were 
collected using Time-Line Follow back (TLFB). TLFB is a retrospective calendar for self-report 
daily substance use 89. Biological markers of Nicotine dependence were collected in urine and 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
breath. Urine samples were lab analyzed for cotinine levels, sensitive to detecting past 6 day use. 
Breath carbon monoxide (CO) were collected using Bedfont Micro lll Smokalizer instrument, 
sensitive at detecting nicotine use past 24 hours 74.  
OCD rating scales
Symptoms of OCD were measured with a patient rated visual analogue scale for overall 
obsessive-compulsive symptom severity (lacking information regarding which scale) and the 
clinician administered Yale-Brown obsessive compulsive scale [YBOCS] 90.
Subjective experience rating scales
Across the included studies, the subjective drug experience were measured by the 
following scales: The Mystical Experience Questionnaire 30 item version [MEQ30] and 43 item 
version (MEQ43) 91,92, 11-Dimensional altered states of consciousness questionnaire [11D-ASC] 
93, 5-Dimentional altered states of consciousness questionnaire [5D-ASC] 94, Hallucinogen rating 
scale [HRS] 95, and State of consciousness questionnaire [SOCQ] 91. Both the MEQ30 and 
MEQ43 are embedded within the 100-item States of consciousness questionnaire [SOCQ] and 
thus requires administration of the SOCQ 91. See supplementary table 7 for details. 
Mood and anxiety disorders
In an open-label trial by Sanches and colleagues 35, 17 patients with recurrent major 
depressive disorder (DSM-IV diagnosed) participated received one oral dose of ayahuasca 
(1.76mg/kg n,n-DMT). In study there was no control condition and participants therefore served as 
their own controls. They had an average HAM-D score of 19.2 at baseline, and their symptoms 
were assessed at baseline and again at 1, 2, 7, and 21 days post treatment.  Participants were 
admitted to an inpatient ward for a 2 week stay prior to drug ingestion, including a complete taper 
off any antidepressant medication. None of the participants had any history of illicit drug use or 
any use of ayahuasca. Significant decreases in scores of depression (HAM-D, MADRS) and 
scores of anxious-depression (subscale of Brief psychiatric rating scale) were observed at all 
points of assessment post treatment (p< 0.001). 
Palhano-Fontes and colleagues 96 also tested ayahuasca for treatment of depression. Here, 
29 patients with treatment-resistant unipolar depression were randomized to either placebo or one 
dose of freeze-dried ayahuasca brew (1.1mg/kg n,n-dmt). All participants had HAM-D score of 18 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
or more, with a mean of 21.8. All patients had a history of two or more failed antidepressant 
treatments, and 23 had previously been in psychotherapy. None of the patients had any prior use of 
ayahuasca. All participants were weaned off their antidepressant medications prior to drug 
administration, however most were regular users of benzodiazepines. Significant between group 
differences with a strong effect size are seen at day seven in favor of the Ayahuasca group (p= 
0.019, d = 0.98).  At day seven, a significant difference in response rate were seen between the 
ayahuasca group and placebo group, with a clinical response rate of 57% and 20%, respectively 
(p= 0.04). No significant group differences were seen in remission rates, 43% in aya group vs. 
13% in placebo (p=0.07). 
In a London-based open-label, uncontrolled study by Carhart-Harris and colleagues, 20 
patients with moderate (2/20) or severe (18/20) unipolar major treatment-resistant depression each 
received two doses of psilocybin 97. Seventeen patients had previously received some form of 
psychotherapy intervention, and all participants had a history of unsuccessful treatment of no less 
than two different anti-depressant medication. Psilocybin was administered at a moderate [safety 
test] dose (10mg), and one week later followed by a high dose (25mg). Significant short to mid-
term reductions in Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptoms (QIDS-SR16) scores were seen on 
assessments 1-5 weeks post therapy (d range = 2.1-2.3, p<0.001), as compared with baseline. 
Long term assessments revealed sustained effects with significant effects sizes at 3 (d=1.5, 
p<0.001) and 6 months (d=1.6, p=0.004) follow-up. Significant and sustained effects were also 
seen on all secondary outcome depression (HAM-D, BDI), anxiety (STAI) and anhedonia 
(SHAPS) measures at all points of assessment. 
[ INSERT TABLE 1 – MOOD ANXIETY STUDY OUTCOMES ]
Moreno and colleagues 60 recruited 9 TR-OCD patients with obsessive compulsive disorder 
(OCD) for a modified double-blind study on psilocybin’s treatment efficacy, tolerability and 
safety 60. All participants met DSM-IV criteria for OCD and were required to have at least one 
earlier treatment failure with an SRI before study enrollment. None of the participants were 
currently on anti-depressant medication during the trial. Participants were given up to four 
administrations of psilocybin separated by at least one week, in an escalating dosage sequence of 
100µg/kg, 200µg/kg and 300µg/kg. Following the first 100µg/kg session, each participant 
received an active placebo-like dose (25µg psilocybin), which was randomly assigned once at any 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
of the remaining three sessions. Decreases in OCD symptoms score (YBOCS) were observed in 
all nine subjects at one or more of the testing sessions, decreases ranged from 23-100%. Eight of 
the nine subjects reported a symptom reduction of  ≥ 25%, while six of them experienced ≥ 50% 
symptom reduction, as measured 24hours after at least one of the various psilocybin treatment 
sessions. One subject qualitatively reported having achieved a sustained long-term remission at 6-
month follow-up.
End of life anxiety and depression
Grob and colleagues 61 recruited 12 subjects for a double blind, placebo-controlled study 
on psilocybin’s anxiolytic effects. Together with a life-threatening cancer diagnosis all participants 
had a DSM-IV diagnosis of either acute stress disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, anxiety 
disorder due to cancer, or adjustment disorder with anxiety (number of patients with each 
diagnosis not reported). Every patient underwent a total of two experimental sessions; one active 
placebo session (Niacin 250mg) and one psilocybin session (0.2mg/kg dose). The order of the 
drug administration was randomized, with both the treatment staff and patients being blinded to 
this procedure. Between groups and within group analysis was conducted. No significant between 
groups differences were found on any of the outcome measures. Comparing means of the whole 
group at baseline with scores at follow up (after both groups received the psilocybin) shows 
significant reduction in trait anxiety at 1 and 3-months, and in depression at 6-month follow-up.  
In a related trial, Peter Gasser and colleagues 69 evaluated the safety and efficacy of LSD-
assisted psychotherapy in patients with anxiety related to chronic life-threatening illness (cancer, 
chronic motor- or autoimmune disease). A total of 12 patients were enrolled for this double-blind, 
randomized, active placebo-controlled pilot study. All patients had a baseline STAI trait or state 
score of above 40 and met DSM-IV criteria for an anxiety or depression disorder, with the 
majority meeting criteria for GAD (n=6) and/or Major depression (n=7). The participants were 
allocated to receive two experimental sessions assisted by either active dose LSD (200µg) or LSD 
at an active placebo dose (20µg), separated 2-3 weeks apart. Two months after the final 
experimental session, the blinding subsided; participants in placebo group were allocated to an 
additional open label crossover to the LSD (200µg) treatment condition.  Results at two-month 
assessment after final experimental sessions show significant between group differences in state 
anxiety (p = 0.021, F = 4.846, df = 2,18). Looking at the assessments after all participants have 
received the full dose condition (after crossover, post-hoc within-group analysis) shows significant 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
reductions of trait and state anxiety at 2 and 12-month follow-up, as compared to scores at 
baseline 72.
Griffiths and colleagues 66 more recently conducted a study of psilocybin efficacy in 
treatment of depressed mood and anxiety in psychologically distressed cancer patients 75. In 
addition to a confirmed life-threatening cancer diagnosis, all participants met DSM-IV criteria for 
the following disorders: chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety (n=11) or with mixed anxiety 
and depression (n=11), MDD (n=14), dysthymic disorder (n=6), generalized anxiety (GAD) (n=5), 
or a combination of GAD and MDD (n=4). Participants were randomly assigned to either a group 
receiving a placebo-like low dose first (1 or 3 mg/70kg, or to a high dose first group (22 or 
30mg/70kg), with a crossover to the opposite condition after 5 weeks. Clinical assessments were 
performed at baseline, 5 weeks post dose 1 (prior to second dose), 10 weeks post dose 1 (5 weeks 
post dose 2) and 6 months post dose 2. Five weeks after the first psilocybin session, the patients 
who had received the high dose experienced significantly more pronounced decreases in measures 
of depressed mood and anxiety when compared to patients who had received the low (placebo-
like) dose. Thus, clinical significant anti-depressant response at 5 weeks post first drug session 
was observed for 92% of the patients receiving the high dose, compared to a 32% response rate in 
patients receiving the low dose. Similarly, significant results were seen for anxiety with clinical 
response rates of 76% and 24%, for the high and low-dose group, respectively. Effects were 
significant, immediately after receiving the high dose sessions, no matter what order patients 
received the two sessions. These effects were for both groups sustained at 6 months’ follow-up. 
Thus, at the 6 months follow-up, there was an average clinical response rate of 83% for anxiety 
and 78% for depression among the whole group, with remission rates of 57% and 65%, 
respectively. 
In a similar study by Ross and colleagues 65, 29 cancer patients participated in a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled trial assessing the symptom reduction of psilocybin 
assisted psychotherapy on anxiety and depression associated with life-threatening cancer 65. All 
patients met DSM criteria of a psychiatric diagnosis related to anxiety of either adjustment 
disorder (90%) or GAD (10%). Participants were randomly allocated to two groups, one group 
receiving psilocybin first and other group receiving a non-active placebo, niacin, first, with a 
crossover 7 weeks later to the opposite experimental condition. Clinical assessments were 
conducted 1 day, 2 weeks, 6 weeks and 7 weeks (1 day prior to second dose) following the first 
drug dose. Then 1-day, 6 weeks and 6 months post dose 2. The psilocybin first treatment group 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
achieved significant within-group reductions after their psilocybin dose, on all measures on 
anxiety and depression, as compared to scores at baseline. These reductions were acute (one day 
after), and significantly maintained at all points of assessment. At 7 weeks after the first psilocybin 
dose there were significant clinical anti-depressive response rate in 83% of the patients (using 
BDI) and a 58% anxiolytic response rate by measure of HADS-A (vs. a 14% response rate in the 
placebo group for both measures). Symptom reductions were also significantly larger than what 
was seen for the niacin first group for all clinical outcome measure assessments up until the cross 
over. After receiving their psilocybin dose at cross-over, the niacin first group demonstrated 
within-group symptom reductions similar to the psilocybin first group. For both groups, all clinical 
outcome scores were significantly reduced at the 8 months’ follow-up in comparison with 
baseline. Response rates at 8 months were ranging from 60-80% on all outcome measures (HADS-
A, HADS-D, HADS-T and BDI). A recent long-term follow-up on the same sample73 shows that 
for the surviving sample (n=15) 60-80% of these participants still met criteria for clinically 
significant antidepressant or anxiolytic response at 4.5 year follow-up. Additionally, the reductions 
in hopelessness, demoralization, and death anxiety seen in the original 8 month follow-up were 
sustained at the 4.5 year follow-up.  
[ INSERT TABLE  2 – END OF LIFE STUDY OUTCOMES ]
[ INSERT FIGURE 1 – DEPRESSION OVER TIME ]
Substance use disorder
In an open-label trial, Bogenschutz and colleagues 63 assessed the effect of psilocybin 
treatment in 10 patients with DSM-IV-established diagnosis alcohol dependence. Psilocybin was 
administered at two separate occasions, first at week 4 (moderate-high dose of 21mg/70kg) and 
second session at week 8 (high dose 28mg/70kg). The change in drinking behavior (change in 
percent heavy drinking days assessed with TLFB) from baseline to 1 to 8 weeks after the first 
psilocybin session, served as the primary study outcome. Drinking behaviour was divided into 
number of days with any drinking (abbreviated TLFB AD) and number of days in which more 
than 4 alcohol units were consumed (i.e. heavy drinking, abbreviated TLFB HD). Patients were 
followed up for 32 weeks after their first psilocybin treatment, and compared to both baseline and 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
to the 4-week period prior to psilocybin administration, significant reductions in drinking days and 
heavy drinking days were observed at all assessment time points throughout this 32 week follow 
up period. 
In another substance use disorder study, Johnson and colleagues 74 examined the feasibility 
and safety of using psilocybin treatment to treat smoking dependence. Fifteen nicotine-dependent 
smokers were included in the trial, and psilocybin was given in up to three sessions. Psilocybin 
was administered at week 5 (moderate dose, 20mg/70kg), week 7 (high dose, 30mg/70kg) and 
week 13 (moderate or high dose, 30mg/70kg). Monitoring of smoking cessation consisted of a 
retrospective self-report calendar assessing smoking days, biomarker analysis of breath carbon 
monoxide, and urine-cotinine. At 6 months’ follow-up, 80% of the participants (12/15) were 
abstinent, and compared to baseline, all participants showed significant reductions in both self-
reported daily smoking, urine cotinine, and breath carbon monoxide at this time point 74. In a 
recent follow-up paper by the same authors 71, 67% (10/15) of the participants were still abstinent 
after 12-months (confirmed by levels of urine cotinine and breath carbon monoxide) with 9 of 
them abstinent at subsequent long-term follow-up (mean 30 months post-first psilocybin session). 
Seven of the 
nine reported continuous abstinence since first psilocybin session 71.
[ INSERT TABLE 3 – SUBSTANCE USE STUDY OUTCOMES ]
Quality of the subjective experience as clinical predictor.
Except for the trial investigating ayahuasca for major depressive disorder35, all other 
reviewed trials collected data on participant’s subjective psychedelic experience. Seven of these 9 
trials reported on associations between these measures and primary clinical outcomes. Two trials 
(one investigating psilocybin for I-RADD, and one investigating LSD for C-RADD) out of these 9 
trials did report collecting subjective experience data but did not provide information about 
conducting any analyses with such data. For the only trial testing psilocybin for OCD 60 a non-
significant correlation was detected between HRS score and YBOCS score changes. 
In the remaining 6 studies (1 x psilocybin for TR-D, 2 x psilocybin for C-RADD, 2 x 
psilocybin for substance use disorder, and 1 x ayahuasca for depression) the magnitude of the 
mystical/peak experience during the psychedelic treatment session was found to be a significant 
predictor of short and mid/long term clinical benefits. Mystical/peak experience predicted short 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
term clinical outcomes (1-8 weeks) in 5 of these 6 studies 75-77,96,98, and long term clinical outcome 
(30 months) in one trial (psilocybin for smoking cessation)99. 
Additionally, non-significant correlations were also found in several trials. As an example, 
in one trial (investigating psilocybin for cancer related anxiety and depression) MEQ30 measured 
on the psilocybin dosing day did not significantly correlate with clinical outcome change scores 
measured at long term follow up after 4.5 years 73. For a complete overview of the different 
mystical/peak experience outcome measures and treatment outcome correlations for each study, 
please see suppl. table 7.
Setting
In all trials included in this review, the active drug was administered in quite similar 
controlled settings. Common for the psychedelic sessions in 9 of 10 of the trials are the following 
five factors: 1) Session conducted individually in an isolated environment/specific room, 2) 
treatment personnel present for the patient at all times (either in the same room, or in the room 
next door), 3) participants instructed to listen to a standardized set of music while lying down on a 
bed, or in a reclined chair, 4) Limit lightning by dimmed lights, and/or instructing patients to wear 
eyeshades, 5) treatment staff providing non-directive psychosocial support if needed. The only 
trial deviating from these five factors was the open label ayahuasca trial 35, where the music 
component was not included. See table 6 (supplementary file) for tabular overview of each trial 
setting.
Adverse events
Apart from the ayahuasca trial by Palhano-Fontes and colleagues67, all studies monitored 
blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR). Across studies, BP and HR increases were reported to be 
transient and dose-dependent (when more than one dose was used, 61,65), and typically peaking 
about 2-3 hours post-dose with a subsequent steady return to pre-dose levels towards the end of 
the sessions. There were no reports of any serious cardiovascular adverse events in any of the 
trials. With regard to non-cardiovascular side-effects, the reporting varied between studies, with 
some using systematic collections with formal questionnaires and observer ratings 35,66,74,96, while 
others relied on less formalized patient reports or structured questioning during follow-up 
60,61,65,69,70,77. For the ayahuasca trials, 31 ayahuasca doses were given to 31 patients, and the most 
common side-effects reported purging (n=16, 52%), nausea (n=10, 32%) and transient anxiety 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
(n=7, 23%). Across the psilocybin trials, a total of 145 patients received 268 doses psilocybin. 
Most common side-effects reported among this group were transient anxiety/fear (n=39, 27%), 
headache (n=32, 22%), nausea or purging (n=18, 12%). In the single study using LSD, 11 patients 
received 22 doses of LSD, and the most frequent adverse events were illusions (72.7%), feeling 
cold (45.4 %), and a feeling of abnormality (40.9%). Overall, all reported side effects were mild 
and transient. See suppl. table 8 for complete overview of reported side-effects. 
DISCUSSION
We systematically reviewed 10 post-millennium psychedelic-assisted therapy studies (16 
papers) for mental health indications, with a total of 188 patients being dosed with psilocybin, 
LSD or ayahuasca/DMT. Overall, these trials established feasibility and evidence of safety, 
alongside promising early data of efficacy in the treatment of depression / depressive symptoms, 
anxiety, OCD, and tobacco and alcohol use disorders. Importantly, all the reviewed studies were 
conducted in line with guidelines for the safe conduct of psychedelic therapy 100, and no severe 
adverse events were reported. The most prevalent transient side effects were anxiety/psychological 
distress, headache and nausea, the latter particularly in ayahuasca studies (suppl. table 8).
The open-label nature and the relatively small scale of most of these reviewed studies 
warrant some caution when trying to conclude on efficacy of psychedelic-assisted therapies. 
This is also the case for a study undertaken by our team, where marked and sustained 
reductions in depression scores among 20 patients suffering resistant major depression were 
observed, even at 6 months follow-up 97. In support of an antidepressant effect beyond placebo 
levels, however, comparable efficacies were reported in the two larger controlled studies assessing 
depressive (and anxiety) symptoms in cancer patients, using non-active placebo 76 or low-dose of 
psilocybin 75 as control condition. Conclusive evidence for an antidepressant effect may come 
from the larger-scale multicentre COMPASSPathways101 and Usona Institute102 studies, both of 
which have received breakthrough status by the US Food and Drug Administration. In these 
studies, patients with resistant and major depression, respectively, will be randomised to full dose 
psilocybin condition versus either low/miniscule dose psilocybin as control condition in the 
COMPASS trial103 or niacin in the Usona trial104. The prediction for these trials is that the 
antidepressant effect will be dose-dependent and superior to placebo, with the lowest dose of 1mg 
being ineffective. Furthermore, our current trial of psilocybin versus the selective serotonin 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
reuptake inhbitor (SSRI), escitalopram105, is addressing possible differences in neurobiological 
mechanisms (e.g. on functional magnetic resonanse, fMRI, network connectivity and amygdala 
reactivity) behind the antidepressant effects of these two different treatment paradigms. Similarly, 
more work is required to confirm open-label early evidence of efficacy for treatment of OCD 60. 
The only published modern-era study of psychedelic-assisted therapy for alcohol use 
disorder supports these observations, shows significant long-lasting (> 8months) reductions in 
drinking days following psilocybin administration 63. In support, a recent meta-analysis of clinical 
studies in alcohol dependence from The 1950-70s concluded significantly improved odds ratio 
(OR) for abstinence (OR 2.0) after single high-dose of LSD 106. With the caveat of an open-label 
design, the observed effect in the study by Bogenschutz and colleagues rivals those of currently 
available medications for alcohol use disorder: acamprosate vs. placebo OR of 1.9 107; naltrexone 
vs. placebo OR of 1.3 108; disulfiram vs. other/no treatment OR of 1.6 109. 
In the reviewed study of tobacco dependence 71,110, 2-3 psilocybin doses in combination 
with cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) for smoking cessation resulted in substantially higher 6 
months smoking abstinence rates than typically observed with other medications or CBT alone 111. 
A potential future role in treatment of addiction also finds support from attenuated ethanol self-
administration in rodents following administration of psychedelics 112, as well as from 
observations in human subjects of reduced consumption and craving of alcohol and other 
substances following psychedelic use in naturalistic contexts [e.g. in ceremonies]  113-117.
A key shared feature of the range of conditions for which psychedelic therapies show 
promise - from affective disorders to addictions – is a narrowed, internalized mental state 118. In 
depression, patients often find themselves stuck in self-critical rumination about failing and guilt. 
In addictions, the object of the given addiction – whether it is a substance or a behaviour - replaces 
the negative thinking in depression, resulting in a specific, narrow, and rigid focus; with 
rumination about seeking the relief afforded by the object. The rationale for using psychedelics in 
conditions such as OCD, anorexia – and even in binge eating/food addiction in obesity -  is 
consistent given that there is rumination on intrusive thoughts, e.g., about contamination or calorie 
mismanagement.
Role of the subjective experience
Although the potentially transformative nature of safely supported psychedelic experiences 
are still poorly understood, interesting discoveries are emerging. Through 5-HT2A receptor 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
agonism, psychedelics dose-dependently 33,  produce a wide range of idiosyncratic acute effects on 
the consciousness of the self and the environment often referred to as ‘peak’ or ‘mystical’ 
experiences 53. These are characterized by profound alterations in perception, accompanied by a 
sense of meaningfulness, insightfulness and unity 119,120 and it has been proposed that the 
psychedelic state is more malleable, flexible, sensitive to the environment, and open to change 
121,122. A key feature that makes psychedelic therapy constitute a novel treatment paradigm when 
compared to conventional pharmacological management of mental health conditions, is the role of 
these subjective peak experiences. Thus, in most of the reviewed studies, the quality and intensity 
of the acute psychological experience following psychedelic intake is predictive of the clinical 
outcomes, i.e. reductions in depressive symptoms  120, alcohol use and craving 63, and tobacco 
smoking 62. For complete overview of such relationships, please see supplementary table 7. 
These observations replicate old-era studies in which the psychedelic-induced peak or 
mystical-type experiences also were observed to predict positive long-term outcomes 14,123-126. 
Similarly, increases in scores of openness to experience 50 as well as psychological wellbeing 
46,49,127 following psychedelic interventions have been predicted by measures of the peak 
experiences in studies of healthy volunteers. Interestingly, the relationship between the peak and 
subsequent clinical outcome appears to be somewhat specific, in that measures related to peak 
experiences are significantly more predictive of positive clinical outcomes than e.g. altered visual 
and auditory perception 120 – thereby giving emphasis to the “psychedelic” (from Greek, meaning 
“mind-revealing”) rather than the “hallucinogen” effect of these substances. Although not 
consistently collected in such studies, similar observations have been reported with the non-classic 
psychedelic or “dissociative” compound, ketamine. Thus, scores related to the mystical-type 
experience - but not dissociative-type experiences - under ketamine were found to mediate 
reduced drug use and craving among cocaine dependent individuals 128.
The increasingly popular phenomenon of using psychedelic compounds in repeated small 
doses (typically 2-3 doses per week of 5-10% of full tripping doses), so-called ”microdosing”, in 
order to improve mood, wellbeing, cognition and creativity 129, raises the question of whether a 
full psychedelic experience is required as microdosing is typically understood to be sub-
perceptual. So far there have been no trials of microdosing for any psychiatric disorder and it 
seems implausible that a single dose in microdosing range of psilocybin would have as big an 
effect in depression as the 25mg psilocybin macrodose usually used. Again, the newly launched 
depression trials using both micro[ as active placebo] and macrodoses of psilocybin will help us 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
understand this better, and additionally, placebo-controlled studies of psychedelic microdosing are 
on their way.
Long-lasting therapeutic effects
In addition to the role of the subjective experience, another remarkable difference between 
psychedelic therapy and the repeated (daily) dosing used in conventional pharmaco-therapy, is the 
apparent long-lasting therapeutic effects of single psychedelic intervention(s). Of note, 
psychedelics have plasma half-lives of minutes (DMT 130) to hours (psilocybin 131 and LSD 132). 
Figure 1 gives a visual representation of the reductions over time in depressive symptoms from 
studies assessing such symptoms, and indicates that treatment effects from psychedelic therapy 
might last for months. In comparison, the antidepressant effect of the glutamate antagonist 
anaesthetic ketamine, esketamine, ranges from days to weeks 133 -  its enantiomer, esketamine, was 
recently licensed in the USA and Europe for treatment of resistant depression. It is here worth 
noticing that ketamine, with its history as a drug used in anaesthesiology, is typically administered 
in a medical context without same attention to the setting (such as preparation, psychological 
integration, room design, light, music etc.) as in psychedelic interventions. In the future a direct 
comparison of ketamine versus psilocybin should be carried out in a randomised design using a 
psychedelic setting and post trip psychotherapy or both drugs, in order to assess duration of effects 
when given under the same conditions – to see whether the context could affect (further 
improve/prolong) the treatment effects of ketamine.
How to explain these sustained therapeutic effects? Where standard antidepressants protect 
against the stressors that lead to and perpetuate depression they do not directly affect the 
underlying cause. In contrast, psychedelic therapy is understood to harnesses a therapeutic window 
opened up by the brain effects of the drugs to facilitate insight and emotional release and, with 
psychotherapeutic support, a subsequent healthy revision of outlook and lifestyle 122. This notion 
is supported by observations from studies of healthy psychedelic-naive individuals, where the 
majority of subjects who underwent psilocybin 2-3 administrations rated the psilocybin-
occasioned experience as being among the five most personally meaningful and spiritually 
significant experiences of their lives with  subsequent increases in well-being and life satisfaction 
at follow-up after 14 months 134. Although the long-lasting effects – maybe even enduring for 
some individuals – seem very promising, more work needs to be conducted to understand who 
would benefit from re-dosing when/if the therapeutic [e.g. antidepressant] effects are wearing off. 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
How and when should patients who are relapsing receive a booster intervention session, and could 
these be conducted more cost effectively than the current use of long [full day] sessions with 
minimum two professionals present? Could re-dosing happen in a group setting and/or could 
sessions be shortened, e.g. by administering shorter acting psychedelics, such as DMT or 5Meo-
DMT, or by using intravenous rather than oral administration of psilocybin [which would shorten 
the drug effect from 4-5 hrs to around 1 hr]?
Possible mechanisms 
In contrast to conventional antidepressant medication, such as SSRIs, which mainly exert 
their action pre-synaptically via blockade of mono-amine transporters, psychedelic compound 
show high affinity and agonist activity at serotonergic receptors; namely 5-HT2A but also 5-HT2c, 
5-HT1a/b, and LSD also has affinity for dopaminergic receptors and 5-HT6 and 5-HT7 135-138. 
Notably, blockade of the 5-HT2A receptor in humans, e.g. with the 5HT2A receptor antagonist 
ketanserin, blocks the subjective effects as well as mood-improving effects of psilocybin and LSD 
139-141, and furthermore, the experienced drug intensity under psilocybin is tightly associated with 
its occupancy on the 5-HT2A receptor as assessed with positron emission tomography (PET) 33. 
Evidence suggests that 5-HT2A receptors are centrally involved in affect regulation. Stress 
can increase 5-HT2A receptor density 142 and affinity 143 in rodents, and elevated 5-HT2A receptor 
expression has been observed in depressed suicide victims 144 and among un-medicated remitted 
depressed patients with high traits “pessimism” 145 and “dysfunctional attitudes” 146. Similarly, 
trait “negativism” 147 and “neuroticism” 148,149 - the latter a known vulnerability marker for 
depression 150 -  are positively associated with 5-HT2A receptor binding. 
Elevated 5-HT2A receptor binding might be related to a low serotonergic state 151 and 
reflect a compensatory upregulation. Interestingly, LSD reverses deficient avoidance learning 152, 
which is consistent with other effective antidepressants 153, and experimental exposure to LSD and 
psilocybin causes down-regulation of the 5-HT2A receptor in rodents 154. Similarly, recreational 
use of psychedelics in humans is associated with reduced cortical 5-HT2A receptor binding as 
assessed with PET 155. Also most antidepressants cause 5-HT2A receptor down-regulation 156, and 
the antidepressant effect of electro-convulsive therapy (ECT) has been positively associated with 
down-regulation of cortical 5-HT2A receptor 157. Recently, however, PET scans revealed no 
detectable changes in 5-HT2A receptor binding 1 week after oral psilocybin administration in a 
small sample 10 healthy volunteers 158. 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Increased flexible and “divergent” thinking induced by 5-HT2A receptor agonism 159-162 
might constitute a central component of the therapeutic action of 5-HT2A receptor stimulation. 
Importantly, administration of psilocybin 50 and LSD 163 to healthy individuals can lead to 
increased openness – a trait positively associated with cognitive flexibility 164. Recreational use of 
psychedelics is also associated with high openness scores 165, and recently, sustained increases in 
openness after psilocybin therapy were detected among patients with treatment resistant 
depression – of far greater magnitude than previously observed with conventional antidepressant 
treatments 166. Psychedelics likely work by dysregulating activity in systems and circuits that 
encode inflexible habits of thought and behaviour as seen in affective disorders and addictions 118, 
allowing them to recalibrate as the acute effects of the drugs subside 121. Scientists from Johns 
Hopkins University have suggested that their effects can be conceptualized similar to the model of 
production of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), but inverted 62. In contrast to a traumatic 
event leaving the person with symptoms of avoidance, anxiety and long-term distress, the 
psychedelic experience with its flexible brain state, offers a profound and meaningful experience 
could cause lasting, beneficial and corrective change to the individual’s psyche 50. Studies looking 
into both the longevity of plasticity-inducing effects as well as the neurobiological mechanisms 
behind such effects are currently being undertaken in our lab at Imperial College using 
neuroplasticity EEG paradigms – but can also be investigated with PET mapping of 
synaptogenesis.
In terms of effects on the brain’s functional networks, fMRI reveals increases in functional 
connectivity within the default mode network (DMN) and decreased cerebral blood flow in 
amygdala one day after psilocybin-treatment – the latter negatively correlating with improvement 
in depression scores 167. These observations are consistent with studies reporting reductions in 
DMN functional connectivity 168-170 and with elevated amygdala activity 171-174 among untreated 
patients with major depression. Interestingly, successful ECT treatment to depressed patients leads 
to a normalization (increase) of DMN functional connectivity 170. Other fMRI work has shown 
that LSD affects cortico–striato–thalamo-cortical (CSTC) feedback loops implicated in the gating 
of sensory and sensorimotor information to the cortex: LSD diminishes the influence of the 
striatum on the thalamus and opens the thalamic filter to certain areas of the cortex, including the 
posterior cingulate cortex 175.
Another factor to consider when proposing possible mechanisms behind psychedelic 
therapy is therapeutic alliance between the patient and the therapist. Research on factors common 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
for all psychotherapy traditions suggests that the therapeutic alliance between patient and therapist 
is one of the most robust and consistent factors that predicts therapy outcome 176. The construct of 
therapeutic alliance is centered around two qualities related to therapy practice; the shared 
affective bond between patient and therapist; and common agreement about the tasks and goals of 
the therapy 177. It is possible that the classic psychedelics – as it has been suggested for MDMA in 
the treatment of PTSD 178 - can increase the affective bond between patient and therapist. LSD 
increases blood level oxytocin 179, which is associated with modulating bonding-like experiences 
in man 180. Consistent with this, recent research into the effects of LSD in healthy volunteer’s 
states that LSD has distinct empathogenic effects as it significantly increases the subjects feelings 
of closeness, openness, trust and happiness 181. Further research should assess this by 
incorporating a valid and reliable psychometric measures of therapeutic alliance, one such 
example being Working Alliance Inventory (WAI) 182.
In summary, the resurrection of research into the therapeutic application of psychedelics 
provides promising pilot data on efficacy and safety in the treatment of a range of mental health 
conditions. Furthermore, brain imaging work applied to the study of these 5-HT2A agonists are 
delivering remarkable insights into brain function and instigating an exciting new treatment 
avenue, namely in the fields of affective disorders and addictions, health areas with major unmet 
needs.
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
References
1.
Grispoon L, Bakalar J. Psychedelic drugs reconsidered. New York: Basic Books; 1981.
2.
Osmond H, Smythies J. Schizophrenia: a new approach. The British Journal of Psychiatry. 
1952;98(411):309-315.
3.
Hoffer A, Osmond H, Smythies J. Schizophrenia: a new approach. II. Result of a year's research. 
The British Journal of Psychiatry. 1954;100(418):29-45.
4.
Jensen SE. A treatment program for alcoholics in a mental hospital. Quarterly journal of studies on 
alcohol. 1962;23:315-320.
5.
Jensen S. Treatment of chronic alcoholism with lysergic acid diethylamide. Canadian Psychiatric 
Association Journal. 1963;8:182-188.
6.
Osmond H, Albahary R, Cheek F, Sarett M, Abramson H. Some problems in the use of LSD 25 in 
the treatment of alcoholism. The use of LSD in psychotherapy and alcoholism Indianapolis, IN: 
Bobbs-Merrill. 1967:434-457.
7.
Van Dusen W, Wilson W, Miners W, Hook H. Treatment of alcoholism with lysergide. QJ Stud 
Alcohol. 1967;28:295-304.
8.
Johnson FG. LSD in the treatment of alcoholism. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1969;126(4):481-
487.
9.
Denson R, Sydiaha D. A controlled study of LSD treatment in alcoholism and neurosis. The British 
Journal of Psychiatry. 1970;116(533):443-445.
10.
Smart RG, Storm T, Baker EF, Solursh L. A controlled study of lysergide in the treatment of 
alcoholism: I. The effects on drinking behavior. Quarterly journal of studies on alcohol. 1966.
11.
Hollister LE, Shelton J, Krieger G. A controlled comparison of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and 
dextroamphetamine in alcoholics. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1969;125(10):1352-1357.
12.
Ludwig A, Levine J, Stark L, Lazar R. A clinical study of LSD treatment in alcoholism. American 
Journal of Psychiatry. 1969;126(1):59-69.
13.
Bowen WT, Soskin RA, Chotlos JW. Lysergic acid diethylamide as a variable in the hospital 
treatment of alcoholism: a follow-up study. The Journal of nervous and mental disease. 
1970;150(2):111-118.
14.
Pahnke WN, Kurland AA, Unger S, Savage C, Grof S. The experimental use of psychedelic (LSD) 
psychotherapy. Jama. 1970;212(11):1856-1863.
15.
Tomsovic M, Edwards R. Lysergide treatment of schizophrenic and nonschizophrenic alcoholics: a 
controlled evaluation. Quarterly journal of studies on alcohol. 1970;31(4):932.
16.
Cohen S. The therapeutic potential of LSD-25. In: Simon RMFA, ed. A pharmacologic approach to 
the study of the mind. Springfield, IL: Thomas; 1959.
17.
Johnsen G. Three years' experience with the use of LSD as an aid in Psychotherapy. Acta 
psychiatrica Scandinavica. 1964;40:Suppl 180:383+.
18.
Eisner B, G., Cohen S. Psychotherapy with lysergic acid diethylamide. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Diseas. 1958;127:528-539. .
19.
Brandrup E, Vanggaard T. LSD treatment in a severe case of compulsive neurosis. Acta 
psychiatrica Scandinavica. 1977;55(2):127-141.
20.
Kast EC, Collins VJ. Study of lysergic acid diethylamide as an analgesic agent. Anesthesia and 
analgesia. 1964;43:285-291.
21.
Savage C, & McCabe, O. L. . Residential psychedelic (LSD) therapy for the narcotic 
addict. A 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
controlled study. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1973;28(6):808 – 814.
22.
Grof S, Goodman L, Richards W, Kurland A. LSD-assisted psychotherapy in patients with terminal 
cancer. International pharmacopsychiatry. 1973;8(3):129-144.
23.
Krebs TS, Johansen P-Ø. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for alcoholism: meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Journal of Psychopharmacology. 2012;26(7):994-1002.
24.
Rucker JJ, Jelen LA, Flynn S, Frowde KD, Young AH. Psychedelics in the treatment of unipolar mood 
disorders: a systematic review. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 
2016;30(12):1220-1229.
25.
Wark C, Galliher JF. Timothy Leary, Richard Alpert (Ram Dass) and the changing definition of 
psilocybin. The International journal on drug policy. 2010;21(3):234-239.
26.
Erritzoe D, Richards WA. Lessons to be learned from early psychedelic therapy in Denmark. Nordic 
journal of psychiatry. 2017;71(7):487-488.
27.
Oram M. Efficacy and enlightenment: LSD psychotherapy and the Drug Amendments of 1962. 
Journal of the history of medicine and allied sciences. 2014;69(2):221-250.
28.
Nutt DJ, King LA, Nichols DE. Effects of Schedule I drug laws on neuroscience research and 
treatment innovation. Nature reviews Neuroscience. 2013;14(8):577-585.
29.
Nations U. Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Convention on Psychotropic Substances. ; 
1971.
30.
Vollenweider FX, Leenders KL, Scharfetter C, Maguire P, Stadelmann O, Angst J. Positron emission 
tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose studies of metabolic hyperfrontality and psychopathology in 
the psilocybin model of psychosis. Neuropsychopharmacology. 1997;16(5):357-372.
31.
Vollenweider FX, Vontobel P, Hell D, Leenders KL. 5-HT modulation of dopamine release in basal 
ganglia in psilocybin-induced psychosis in man--a PET study with [11C]raclopride. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 1999;20(5):424-433.
32.
Gouzoulis-Mayfrank E, Schreckenberger M, Sabri O, et al. Neurometabolic effects of psilocybin, 
3,4-methylenedioxyethylamphetamine (MDE) and d-methamphetamine in healthy volunteers. A 
double-blind, placebo-controlled PET study with [18F]FDG. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
1999;20(6):565-581.
33.
Madsen MK, Fisher PM, Burmester D, et al. Psychedelic effects of psilocybin correlate with 
serotonin 2A receptor occupancy and plasma psilocin levels. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2019;44(7):1328-1334.
34.
Riba J, Romero S, Grasa E, Mena E, Carrio I, Barbanoj MJ. Increased frontal and paralimbic 
activation following ayahuasca, the pan-Amazonian inebriant. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2006;186(1):93-98.
35.
Sanches RF, de Lima Osorio F, Dos Santos RG, et al. Antidepressant Effects of a Single Dose of 
Ayahuasca in Patients With Recurrent Depression: A SPECT Study. Journal of clinical 
psychopharmacology. 2016;36(1):77-81.
36.
Carhart-Harris RL, Muthukumaraswamy S, Roseman L, et al. Neural correlates of the LSD 
experience revealed by multimodal neuroimaging. PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF 
SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 2016;113:4853-4858.
37.
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams T, et al. Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as 
determined by fMRI studies with psilocybin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
2012;109(6):2138-2143.
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
38.
Tagliazucchi E, Roseman L, Kaelen M, et al. Increased Global Functional Connectivity Correlates 
with LSD-Induced Ego Dissolution. Current biology : CB. 2016;26(8):1043-1050.
39.
Kraehenmann R, Preller KH, Scheidegger M, et al. Psilocybin-Induced Decrease in Amygdala 
Reactivity Correlates with Enhanced Positive Mood in Healthy Volunteers. Biol Psychiatry. 
2015;78(8):572-581.
40.
Timmermann C, Roseman L, Schartner M, et al. Neural correlates of the DMT experience assessed 
with multivariate EEG. Scientific reports. 2019;9(1):16324.
41.
Palenicek T, Tyls F, Viktorinova M, et al. PM502. Effect of psilocybin on EEG brain connectivity in 
healthy volunteers – preliminary report. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2016;19(Suppl 1):83-83.
42.
Johansen PO, Krebs TS. Psychedelics not linked to mental health problems or suicidal behavior: a 
population study. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2015;29(3):270-279.
43.
Hendricks PS, Thorne CB, Clark CB, Coombs DW, Johnson MW. Classic psychedelic use is 
associated with reduced psychological distress and suicidality in the United States adult 
population. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2015;29(3):280-288.
44.
Barbosa PC, Giglio JS, Dalgalarrondo P. Altered states of consciousness and short-term 
psychological after-effects induced by the first time ritual use of ayahuasca in an urban context in 
Brazil. Journal of psychoactive drugs. 2005;37(2):193-201.
45.
Barbosa PC, Cazorla IM, Giglio JS, Strassman R. A six-month prospective evaluation of personality 
traits, psychiatric symptoms and quality of life in ayahuasca-naive subjects. Journal of 
psychoactive drugs. 2009;41(3):205-212.
46.
Haijen EC, Kaelen M, Roseman L, et al. Predicting responses to psychedelics: a prospective study. 
Frontiers in pharmacology. 2018;9:897.
47.
Santos RGd, Balthazar FM, Bouso JC, Hallak JE. The current state of research on ayahuasca: A 
systematic review of human studies assessing psychiatric symptoms, neuropsychological 
functioning, and neuroimaging. Journal of Psychopharmacology. 2016;30(12):1230-1247.
48.
Dos Santos RG, Bouso JC, Hallak JEC. Ayahuasca, dimethyltryptamine, and psychosis: a systematic 
review of human studies. Therapeutic advances in psychopharmacology. 2017;7(4):141-157.
49.
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences 
having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance. 
Psychopharmacology. 2006;187(3):268-283; discussion 284-292.
50.
MacLean KA, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Mystical experiences occasioned by the hallucinogen 
psilocybin lead to increases in the personality domain of openness. Journal of 
psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2011;25(11):1453-1461.
51.
Riba J, Valle M, Urbano G, Yritia M, Morte A, Barbanoj MJ. Human pharmacology of ayahuasca: 
subjective and cardiovascular effects, monoamine metabolite excretion, and pharmacokinetics. 
The Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics. 2003;306(1):73-83.
52.
Brown RT, Nicholas CR, Cozzi NV, et al. Pharmacokinetics of Escalating Doses of Oral Psilocybin in 
Healthy Adults. Clinical pharmacokinetics. 2017.
53.
Dolder PC, Schmid Y, Steuer AE, et al. Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of Lysergic Acid 
Diethylamide in Healthy Subjects. Clinical pharmacokinetics. 2017.
54.
Rucker JJH, Iliff J, Nutt DJ. Psychiatry & the psychedelic drugs. Past, present & future. 
Neuropharmacology. 2018;142:200-218.
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
55.
Maslow AH. Religions, values, and peak-experiences. Vol 35: Ohio State University Press 
Columbus; 1964.
56.
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Haijen E, Kaelen M, Watts R. Psychedelics and connectedness. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2017.
57.
Grof S. LSD Psychotherapy (The Healing Potential Potential of Psychedelic Medicine). MAPS; 2008.
58.
Dos Santos RG, Osorio FL, Crippa JA, Riba J, Zuardi AW, Hallak JE. Antidepressive, anxiolytic, and 
antiaddictive effects of ayahuasca, psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD): a systematic 
review of clinical trials published in the last 25 years. Therapeutic advances in 
psychopharmacology. 2016;6(3):193-213.
59.
Reiche S, Hermle L, Gutwinski S, Jungaberle H, Gasser P, Majic T. Serotonergic hallucinogens in the 
treatment of anxiety and depression in patients suffering from a life-threatening disease: A 
systematic review. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry. 2018;81:1-10.
60.
Moreno FA, Wiegand CB, Taitano EK, Delgado PL. Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of psilocybin in 
9 patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. The Journal of clinical psychiatry. 
2006;67(11):1735-1740.
61.
Grob CS, Danforth AL, Chopra GS, et al. Pilot Study of Psilocybin Treatment for Anxiety in Patients 
With Advanced-Stage Cancer. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2011;68(1):71-78.
62.
Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR, Johnson MW. Psilocybin-occasioned mystical experiences in the 
treatment of tobacco addiction. Current drug abuse reviews. 2014;7(3):157-164.
63.
Bogenschutz MP, Forcehimes AA, Pommy JA, Wilcox CE, Barbosa PC, Strassman RJ. Psilocybin-
assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: a proof-of-concept study. Journal of 
psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2015;29(3):289-299.
64.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, et al. Psilocybin with psychological support for 
treatment-resistant depression: An open-label feasibility study. The Lancet Psychiatry. 
2016;3(7):619-627.
65.
Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, et al. Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin 
treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening cancer: A randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Psychopharmacology. 2016;30(12):1165-1180.
66.
Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Carducci MA, et al. Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained 
decreases in depression and anxiety in patients with life-threatening cancer: A randomized 
double-blind trial. Journal of Psychopharmacology. 2016;30(12):1181-1197.
67.
Palhano-Fontes F, Barreto D, Onias H, et al. Rapid antidepressant effects of the psychedelic 
ayahuasca in treatment-resistant depression: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Psychol Med. 
2019;49(4):655-663.
68.
Osorio Fde L, Sanches RF, Macedo LR, et al. Antidepressant effects of a single dose of ayahuasca in 
patients with recurrent depression: a preliminary report. Revista brasileira de psiquiatria. 
2015;37(1):13-20.
69.
Gasser P, Holstein D, Michel Y, et al. Safety and efficacy of lysergic acid diethylamide-assisted 
psychotherapy for anxiety associated with life-threatening diseases. J Nerv Ment Dis. 
2014;202(7):513-520.
70.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Day CMJ, et al. Psilocybin with psychological support for 
treatment-resistant depression: six-month follow-up. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2018;235(2):399-408.
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
71.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR. Long-term follow-up of psilocybin-facilitated smoking 
cessation. The American journal of drug and alcohol abuse. 2017;43(1):55-60.
72.
Gasser P, Kirchner K, Passie T. LSD-assisted psychotherapy for anxiety associated with a life-
threatening disease: a qualitative study of acute and sustained subjective effects. Journal of 
psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2015;29(1):57-68.
73.
Agin-Liebes GI, Malone T, Yalch MM, et al. Long-term follow-up of psilocybin-assisted 
psychotherapy for psychiatric and existential distress in patients with life-threatening cancer. 
Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2020;34(2):155-166.
74.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, Griffiths RR. Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR agonist 
psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. Journal of Psychopharmacology. 
2014;28(11):983-992.
75.
Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Carducci MA, et al. Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained 
decreases in depression and anxiety in patients with life-threatening cancer: A randomized 
double-blind trial. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2016;30(12):1181-1197.
76.
Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, et al. Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin 
treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of psychopharmacology. 2016;30(12):1165-1180.
77.
Bogenschutz M, Forcehimes A, A Pommy J, Wilcox C, Ribeiro Barbosa PC, Strassman R. Psilocybin-
assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: A proof-of-concept study. 2015;29.
78.
Grob CS, Danforth AL, Chopra GS, et al. Pilot study of psilocybin treatment for anxiety in patients 
with advanced-stage cancer. Archives of general psychiatry. 2011;68(1):71-78.
79.
Beck A, Steer RA. BDI Beck Depression Inventory Manual. San Antonio, San Diego, Orlando, New 
York, Chicago, Toronto: The Psychological Corporation Harcourt Brace Jovanovic, Inc; 1987.
80.
Montgomery SA, Asberg M. A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change. Br J 
Psychiatry. 1979;134:382-389.
81.
Hamilton M. Rating depressive patients. The Journal of clinical psychiatry. 1980;41(12 Pt 2):21-24.
82.
Williams JB, Kobak KA, Bech P, et al. The GRID-HAMD: standardization of the Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale. International clinical psychopharmacology. 2008;23(3):120-129.
83.
Snaith RP, Hamilton M, Morley S, Humayan A, Hargreaves D, Trigwell P. A scale for the assessment 
of hedonic tone the Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale. Br J Psychiatry. 1995;167(1):99-103.
84.
Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Ibrahim HM, et al. The 16-Item Quick Inventory of Depressive 
Symptomatology (QIDS), clinician rating (QIDS-C), and self-report (QIDS-SR): a psychometric 
evaluation in patients with chronic major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2003;54(5):573-583.
85.
McNair D, M, Lorr M, Droppleman L, F. Profile of Mood States. San Diago, CA: edITS/Educational 
and Industrial Testing Service; 1992.
86.
Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Acta psychiatrica Scandinavica. 
1983;67(6):361-370.
87.
Spielberger CD, Gorssuch, R.L., Lushene, P.R., Vagg, P.R., & Jacobs, G.A. Manual for the State-Trait 
Anxiety Inventory. . Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc.; 1983.
88.
Hamilton M. The assessment of anxiety states by rating. The British journal of medical psychology. 
1959;32(1):50-55.
89.
Collins RL, Kashdan TB, Koutsky JR, Morsheimer ET, Vetter CJ. A self-administered Timeline 
Followback to measure variations in underage drinkers' alcohol intake and binge drinking. 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Addictive behaviors. 2008;33(1):196-200.
90.
Goodman WK, Price LH, Rasmussen SA, et al. The Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale. II. 
Validity. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1989;46(11):1012-1016.
91.
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences 
having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance. 
Psychopharmacology. 2006;187(3):268-283.
92.
MacLean KA, Leoutsakos JMS, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Factor analysis of the mystical 
experience questionnaire: a study of experiences occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocybin. 
Journal for the scientific study of religion. 2012;51(4):721-737.
93.
Studerus E, Gamma A, Vollenweider FX. Psychometric evaluation of the altered states of 
consciousness rating scale (OAV). PLoS One. 2010;5(8):e12412.
94.
Dittrich A, Lamparter D, Maurer M. A short introduction. 5D-ASC: Questionnaire for the 
assessment of altered states of consciousness. Zurich, Switzerland: PSIN PLUS. 2010.
95.
Strassman RJ, Qualls CR, Uhlenhuth EH, Kellner R. Dose-response study of N,N-
dimethyltryptamine in humans. II. Subjective effects and preliminary results of a new rating scale. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1994;51(2):98-108.
96.
Palhano-Fontes F, Barreto D, Onias H, et al. Rapid antidepressant effects of the psychedelic 
ayahuasca in treatment-resistant depression: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Psychol Med. 
2019;49(4):655-663.
97.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Day CMJ, et al. Psilocybin with psychological support for 
treatment-resistant depression: six-month follow-up. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2017.
98.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, et al. Psilocybin with psychological support for 
treatment-resistant depression: an open-label feasibility study. The lancet Psychiatry. 
2016;3(7):619-627.
99.
Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR, Johnson MW. Psilocybin-occasioned Mystical Experiences in the 
Treatment of Tobacco Addiction. Current drug abuse reviews. 2015;7(3):157-164.
100.
Johnson M, Richards W, Griffiths R. Human hallucinogen research: guidelines for safety. Journal of 
psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2008;22(6):603-620.
101.
U.S. National Library of Medicine 2020. The Safety and Efficacy of Psilocybin in Participants With 
Treatment Resistant Depression (P-TRD). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03775200; 2020.
102.
U.S. National Library of Medicine 2020. A Study of Psilocybin for Major Depressive Disorder 
(MDD). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03866174; 2020.
103.
The Safety and Efficacy of Psilocybin in Participants with Treatment Resistant Depression (P-TRD). 
EU Clinical Trials Register; 2020. www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-search/trial/2017-003288-
36/NL.
104.
Usona. Usona Clinical Trials. Major Depressive Disorder and Psilocybin Clinical Trial. 
https://usonaclinicaltrials.org/major-depressive-disorder-psilocybin-clinical-trial-psil201. 
https://usonaclinicaltrials.org/major-depressive-disorder-psilocybin-clinical-trial-psil201. 
Published 2020. Accessed.
105.
U.S. National Library of Medicine 2020. Psilocybin vs Escitalopram for Major Depressive Disorder: 
Comparative Mechanisms (Psilodep-RCT). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03429075; 2020.
106.
Krebs TS, Johansen PO. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for alcoholism: meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2012;26(7):994-
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
1002.
107.
Mason BJ, Lehert P. Acamprosate for alcohol dependence: a sex-specific meta-analysis based on 
individual patient data. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 2012;36(3):497-508.
108.
Bouza C, Angeles M, Munoz A, Amate JM. Efficacy and safety of naltrexone and acamprosate in 
the treatment of alcohol dependence: a systematic review. Addiction. 2004;99(7):811-828.
109.
Jorgensen CH, Pedersen B, Tonnesen H. The efficacy of disulfiram for the treatment of alcohol use 
disorder. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 2011;35(10):1749-1758.
110.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, Griffiths RR. Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR agonist 
psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. Journal of psychopharmacology. 
2014;28(11):983-992.
111.
Cahill K, Stevens S, Lancaster T. Pharmacological treatments for smoking cessation. JAMA. 
2014;311(2):193-194.
112.
Oppong-Damoah A, Curry KE, Blough BE, Rice KC, Murnane KS. Effects of the synthetic psychedelic 
2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine (DOI) on ethanol consumption and place conditioning in male 
mice. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2019;236(12):3567-3578.
113.
Garcia-Romeu A, Davis AK, Erowid F, Erowid E, Griffiths RR, Johnson MW. Cessation and reduction 
in alcohol consumption and misuse after psychedelic use. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, 
England). 2019;33(9):1088-1101.
114.
Barbosa PCR, Tofoli LF, Bogenschutz MP, et al. Assessment of Alcohol and Tobacco Use Disorders 
Among Religious Users of Ayahuasca. Frontiers in psychiatry. 2018;9:136.
115.
Davis AK, Barsuglia JP, Lancelotta R, Grant RM, Renn E. The epidemiology of 5-methoxy- N, N-
dimethyltryptamine (5-MeO-DMT) use: Benefits, consequences, patterns of use, subjective 
effects, and reasons for consumption. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 
2018;32(7):779-792.
116.
Fabregas JM, Gonzalez D, Fondevila S, et al. Assessment of addiction severity among ritual users 
of ayahuasca. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2010;111(3):257-261.
117.
Thomas G, Lucas P, Capler NR, Tupper KW, Martin G. Ayahuasca-assisted therapy for addiction: 
results from a preliminary observational study in Canada. Current drug abuse reviews. 
2013;6(1):30-42.
118.
Nutt D, Erritzoe D, Carhart-Harris R. Psychedelic Psychiatry's Brave New World. Cell. 
2020;181(1):24-28.
119.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Williams TM, et al. Implications for psychedelic-assisted 
psychotherapy: functional magnetic resonance imaging study with psilocybin. Br J Psychiatry. 
2012;200(3):238-244.
120.
Roseman L, Nutt DJ, Carhart-Harris RL. Quality of Acute Psychedelic Experience Predicts 
Therapeutic Efficacy of Psilocybin for Treatment-Resistant Depression. Frontiers in pharmacology. 
2017;8:974.
121.
Carhart-Harris RL, Friston KJ. REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Toward a Unified Model of the Brain 
Action of Psychedelics. Pharmacological reviews. 2019;71(3):316-344.
122.
Carhart-Harris RL, Nutt DJ. Serotonin and brain function: a tale of two receptors. Journal of 
psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2017;31(9):1091-1120.
123.
Klavetter RE, Mogar RE. Peak experiences: Investigation of their relationship to psychedelic 
therapy and self-actualization. Journal of Humanistic Psychology. 1967;7(2):171-177.
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
124.
O'Reilly P, Funk A. LSD in chronic alcoholism. Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal. 
1964;9(3):258-261.
125.
Kurland AA, Grof S, Pahnke WN, Goodman LE. Psychedelic drug assisted psychotherapy in patients 
with terminal cancer. Journal of Thanatology. 1972.
126.
Richards WA, Rhead JC, DiLeo FB, Yensen R, Kurland AA. The peak experience variable in DPT-
assisted psychotherapy with cancer patients. Journal of Psychedelic Drugs. 1977;9(1):1-10.
127.
Schmid Y, Liechti ME. Long-lasting subjective effects of LSD in normal subjects. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2017.
128.
Dakwar E, Nunes EV, Hart CL, Hu MC, Foltin RW, Levin FR. A sub-set of psychoactive effects may 
be critical to the behavioral impact of ketamine on cocaine use disorder: Results from a 
randomized, controlled laboratory study. Neuropharmacology. 2018;142:270-276.
129.
Kuypers KP, Ng L, Erritzoe D, et al. Microdosing psychedelics: More questions than answers? An 
overview and suggestions for future research. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 
2019;33(9):1039-1057.
130.
Strassman RJ, Qualls CR. Dose-response study of N,N-dimethyltryptamine in humans. I. 
Neuroendocrine, autonomic, and cardiovascular effects. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1994;51(2):85-97.
131.
Passie T, Seifert J, Schneider U, Emrich HM. The pharmacology of psilocybin. Addiction biology. 
2002;7(4):357-364.
132.
Dolder PC, Schmid Y, Haschke M, Rentsch KM, Liechti ME. Pharmacokinetics and Concentration-
Effect Relationship of Oral LSD in Humans. The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology. 
2015;19(1).
133.
Corriger A, Pickering G. Ketamine and depression: a narrative review. Drug Des Devel Ther. 
2019;13:3051-3067.
134.
Griffiths R, Richards W, Johnson M, McCann U, Jesse R. Mystical-type experiences occasioned by 
psilocybin mediate the attribution of personal meaning and spiritual significance 14 months later. 
Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2008;22(6):621-632.
135.
Halberstadt AL, Geyer MA. LSD but not lisuride disrupts prepulse inhibition in rats by activating 
the 5-HT2A receptor. Psychopharmacology. 2009;208(2):179.
136.
Marona-Lewicka D, Kurrasch-Orbaugh DM, Selken JR, Cumbay MG, Lisnicchia JG, Nichols DE. Re-
evaluation of lisuride pharmacology: 5-hydroxytryptamine1A receptor-mediated behavioral 
effects overlap its other properties in rats. Psychopharmacology. 2002;164(1):93-107.
137.
Nichols DE. Hallucinogens. Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 2004;101(2):131-181.
138.
Passie T, Halpern JH, Stichtenoth DO, Emrich HM, Hintzen A. The Pharmacology of Lysergic Acid 
Diethylamide: A Review. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics. 2008;14(4):295-314.
139.
Preller KH, Herdener M, Pokorny T, et al. The Fabric of Meaning and Subjective Effects in LSD-
Induced States Depend on Serotonin 2A Receptor Activation. Current Biology. 2017;27(3):451-
457.
140.
Kraehenmann R, Pokorny D, Vollenweider L, et al. Dreamlike effects of LSD on waking imagery in 
humans depend on serotonin 2A receptor activation. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2017.
141.
Kometer M, Schmidt A, Bachmann R, Studerus E, Seifritz E, Vollenweider FX. Psilocybin biases 
facial recognition, goal-directed behavior, and mood state toward positive relative to negative 
emotions through different serotonergic subreceptors. Biol Psychiatry. 2012;72(11):898-906.
142.
Magalhaes AC, Holmes KD, Dale LB, et al. CRF receptor 1 regulates anxiety behavior via 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
sensitization of 5-HT2 receptor signaling. Nature neuroscience. 2010;13(5):622-629.
143.
Harvey BH, Naciti C, Brand L, Stein DJ. Endocrine, cognitive and hippocampal/cortical 5HT 1A/2A 
receptor changes evoked by a time-dependent sensitisation (TDS) stress model in rats. Brain 
research. 2003;983(1-2):97-107.
144.
Mann JJ, Stanley M, Mc Bride PA, Mc Ewen BS. Increased serotonin2 and beta receptor in the 
frontal cortices of suicide victims. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1986;43:954-959.
145.
Meyer JH, McMain S, Kennedy SH, et al. Dysfunctional attitudes and 5-HT2 receptors during 
depression and self-harm. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160(1):90-99.
146.
Bhagwagar Z, Hinz R, Taylor M, Fancy S, Cowen P, Grasby P. Increased 5-HT(2A) receptor binding 
in euthymic, medication-free patients recovered from depression: a positron emission study with 
[(11)C]MDL 100,907. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(9):1580-1587.
147.
Soloff PH, Price JC, Mason NS, Becker C, Meltzer CC. Gender, personality, and serotonin-2A 
receptor binding in healthy subjects. Psychiatry research. 2010;181(1):77-84.
148.
Frokjaer VG, Mortensen EL, Nielsen FA, et al. Frontolimbic serotonin 2A receptor binding in 
healthy subjects is associated with personality risk factors for affective disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 
2008;63(6):569-576.
149.
Frokjaer VG, Vinberg M, Erritzoe D, et al. Familial risk for mood disorder and the personality risk 
factor, neuroticism, interact in their association with frontolimbic serotonin 2A receptor binding. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010;35(5):1129-1137.
150.
Hirschfeld RM, Klerman GL, Lavori P, Keller MB, Griffith P, Coryell W. Premorbid personality 
assessments of first onset of major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1989;46(4):345-350.
151.
Erritzoe D, Holst K, Frokjaer VG, et al. A nonlinear relationship between cerebral serotonin 
transporter and 5-HT(2A) receptor binding: an in vivo molecular imaging study in humans. J 
Neurosci. 2010;30(9):3391-3397.
152.
Buchborn T, Schroder H, Hollt V, Grecksch G. Repeated lysergic acid diethylamide in an animal 
model of depression: Normalisation of learning behaviour and hippocampal serotonin 5-HT2 
signalling. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2014;28(6):545-552.
153.
Kelly JP, Wrynn AS, Leonard BE. The olfactory bulbectomized rat as a model of depression: an 
update. Pharmacol Ther. 1997;74(3):299-316.
154.
Buckholtz NS, Zhou DF, Freedman DX. Serotonin2 agonist administration down-regulates rat brain 
serotonin2 receptors. Life sciences. 1988;42(24):2439-2445.
155.
Erritzoe D, Frokjaer VG, Holst KK, et al. In vivo imaging of cerebral serotonin transporter and 
serotonin(2A) receptor binding in 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA or "ecstasy") 
and hallucinogen users. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(6):562-576.
156.
Roth BL. Irving Page Lecture: 5-HT(2A) serotonin receptor biology: interacting proteins, kinases 
and paradoxical regulation. Neuropharmacology. 2011;61(3):348-354.
157.
Yatham LN, Liddle PF, Lam RW, et al. Effect of electroconvulsive therapy on brain 5-HT(2) 
receptors in major depression. Br J Psychiatry. 2010;196(6):474-479.
158.
Madsen MK, Fisher PM, Stenbæk DS, et al. A single psilocybin dose is associated with long-term 
increased mindfulness, preceded by a proportional change in neocortical 5-HT2A receptor 
binding. European Neuropsychopharmacology. 2020;33:71-80.
159.
Kuypers KP, Riba J, de la Fuente Revenga M, Barker S, Theunissen EL, Ramaekers JG. Ayahuasca 
enhances creative divergent thinking while decreasing conventional convergent thinking. 
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2016;233(18):3395-3403.
160.
Janiger O, Dobkin de Rios M. LSD and creativity. Journal of psychoactive drugs. 1989;21(1):129-
134.
161.
Frecska E, More CE, Vargha A, Luna LE. Enhancement of creative expression and entoptic 
phenomena as after-effects of repeated ayahuasca ceremonies. Journal of psychoactive drugs. 
2012;44(3):191-199.
162.
King AR, Martin IL, Melville KA. Reversal learning enhanced by lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD): 
concomitant rise in brain 5-hydroxytryptamine levels. British journal of pharmacology. 
1974;52(3):419-426.
163.
Lebedev AV, Kaelen M, Lovden M, et al. LSD-induced entropic brain activity predicts subsequent 
personality change. Human brain mapping. 2016;37(9):3203-3213.
164.
DeYoung CG, Peterson JB, Higgins DM. Sources of openness/intellect: cognitive and 
neuropsychological correlates of the fifth factor of personality. Journal of personality. 
2005;73(4):825-858.
165.
Erritzoe D, Smith J, Fisher PM, Carhart-Harris R, Frokjaer VG, Knudsen GM. Recreational use of 
psychedelics is associated with elevated personality trait openness: Exploration of associations 
with brain serotonin markers. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 
2019;33(9):1068-1075.
166.
Erritzoe D. RL, Nour M.M., MacLean K., Kaelen M., Nutt DJ., Carhart- Harris R.L.,. Effects of 
psilocybin therapy on personality structure. Accepted for publication April 2018 in Acta 
Scandinavica Psychiatrica. 2018.
167.
Carhart-Harris RL, Roseman L, Bolstridge M, et al. Psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression: 
fMRI-measured brain mechanisms. Scientific reports. 2017;7(1):13187.
168.
Zhu X, Wang X, Xiao J, et al. Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode 
network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients. Biol Psychiatry. 
2012;71(7):611-617.
169.
Chen Y, Wang C, Zhu X, Tan Y, Zhong Y. Aberrant connectivity within the default mode network in 
first-episode, treatment-naïve major depressive disorder. J Affect Disord. 2015;183:49-56.
170.
Mulders PC, van Eijndhoven PF, Pluijmen J, Schene AH, Tendolkar I, Beckmann CF. Default mode 
network coherence in treatment-resistant major depressive disorder during electroconvulsive 
therapy. J Affect Disord. 2016;205:130-137.
171.
Abercrombie HC, Schaefer SM, Larson CL, et al. Metabolic rate in the right amygdala predicts 
negative affect in depressed patients. Neuroreport. 1998;9(14):3301-3307.
172.
Murray EA, Wise SP, Drevets WC. Localization of dysfunction in major depressive disorder: 
prefrontal cortex and amygdala. Biol Psychiatry. 2011;69(12):e43-54.
173.
Drevets WC, Videen TO, Price JL, Preskorn SH, Carmichael ST, Raichle ME. A functional anatomical 
study of unipolar depression. J Neurosci. 1992;12(9):3628-3641.
174.
Coombs G, 3rd, Loggia ML, Greve DN, Holt DJ. Amygdala perfusion is predicted by its functional 
connectivity with the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and negative affect. PLoS One. 
2014;9(5):e97466.
175.
Preller KH, Razi A, Zeidman P, Stampfli P, Friston KJ, Vollenweider FX. Effective connectivity 
changes in LSD-induced altered states of consciousness in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2019;116(7):2743-2748.
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
176.
Martin DJ, Garske JP, Davis MK. Relation of the therapeutic alliance with outcome and other 
variables: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2000;68(3):438-
450.
177.
Del Re AC, Flückiger C, Horvath AO, Symonds D, Wampold BE. Therapist effects in the therapeutic 
alliance–outcome relationship: A restricted-maximum likelihood meta-analysis. Clinical 
Psychology Review. 2012;32(7):642-649.
178.
Mithoefer MC, Feduccia AA, Jerome L, et al. MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for treatment of 
PTSD: study design and rationale for phase 3 trials based on pooled analysis of six phase 2 
randomized controlled trials. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2019;236(9):2735-2745.
179.
Schmid Y, Enzler F, Gasser P, et al. Acute Effects of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in Healthy Subjects. 
Biol Psychiatry. 2015;78(8):544-553.
180.
Olff M, Frijling JL, Kubzansky LD, et al. The role of oxytocin in social bonding, stress regulation and 
mental health: an update on the moderating effects of context and interindividual differences. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013;38(9):1883-1894.
181.
Schmid Y, Enzler F, Gasser P, et al. Acute Effects of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in Healthy Subjects. 
Biological Psychiatry. 2015;78(8):544-553.
182.
Martin DJ, Garske JP, Davis MK. Relation of the therapeutic alliance with outcome and other 
variables: a meta-analytic review. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2000;68(3):438-450.
Tables and figures.
Table 1. Mood and anxiety disorders
Citation
Outcome 
measure
Assessment and results of primary outcome 
Follow-up assessments
Day 1
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
3 Months
6 Months
Palhano-
Fontes et 
al., 2019
HAM-D
†
d = 0.98* 
†
†
†
†
QIDS-
SR16
†
d= 2.2***
d= 2.2***
d=2.1***
d= 1.5***
d = 1.6**
Carhart-
Harris et 
al. 2018 
STAI-T
†
d= 2.2
†
†
d= 1.2***
d = 1.5***
Sanches 
et al. 
2016
HAM-D
d =‡***
d =‡***
†
d= 2.3***
†
†
Day 1
6 months
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Moreno 
et al., 
2006
YBOCS
Acute and significant symptom reduction seen in all 
patients at 24 hour assessment following at least 
one of the dosing sessions post dose assessments.
One patient in remission as 
reported on 6-month follow-
up (No other data reported)
d= Cohen’s d effect size statistic, †= data not collected or not reported, ‡= exact value not 
reported, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001, bold font= primary outcome measure. Palhano-Fontes 
show between group data, all other trials show within-group data. 
Table 2.  Depression and anxiety disorders related to cancer and other life-threatening illness
Citation
Outcome 
measure
Results of clinical outcomes prior to potential crossover
Follow-up assessment’s 
(Within-group results 
only)
†
†
Week 5
6 months
GRID-
HAM-D
†
†
d=1.30***
d= 2.98***
Griffiths 
et al. 
2016
HAM-A
†
†
d=1.23***
d=3.40***
Day 1
Week 2
Week 6
6 months  
BDI
d=1.10**
d=0.99**
d=1.07**
d=1.03* and 0.93*
Ross et 
al. 2016
STAI-T
d=0.95**
d=1.49***
d=1.31***
d=1.72** and 1.13**
2 months post dose 2
2 months 
post 
crossover
12 months 
post 
crossover
STAI-T
†
†
d=1.1
‡**
‡**
Gasser et 
al. 2014
STAI-S
†
†
d=1.2*
‡**
‡**
 
1 month
3 months
6 months
BDI
†
†
t11=−2.17*
†
t†7=2.71*
STAI-T
†
†
t11=4.36***
t10=2.55*
†
Grob et 
al., 
2011
STAI-S
†
†
†
†
d= Cohen’s d effect size statistic, †= data not collected or not reported, ‡= exact value not reported,  
t= represents t-statistic and is used for studies not reporting d. *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001, bold 
font= primary outcome measure. Griffiths and Ross show between group data, except for 6 months 
follow-up (which represents within group data only). Gasser and Grob show within group data only. 
Table 3.  Alcohol and nicotine dependence
Accepted Article


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Citation
Outcome 
measures 
Results of clinical outcomes
Follow-up assessments
Week 
5-8
Week 
9-12
Week 
13-24
Week 
25-36
No long-term follow-up
TLFB AD
d =1.1*
d =0.8*
d =1.1*
d 
=1.0*
†
Bogenschutz 
et al. 2015
TLFB HD
d =1.0*
d =0.7
d =0.8*
d 
=1.0*
†
10-week duration of the trial
3-year follow-up paper
TLFB 
daily 
cigarette 
use
11/15 reported quitting on their target 
quit date.
Daily cigarette intake significantly*** 
reduced at 6, 12 and 30-month follow-
up for all patients, as compared to 
baseline.
Johnson et 
al. 
2014; 
Johnson et 
al. 2017
Breath 
carbon 
monoxide 
(CO) and 
urine 
cotinine
These eleven were biologically 
verified as abstinent during the entire 
duration of the trial (10 weeks).
Significant* reductions at 6 months, 
with 12/15 showing seven-day 
abstinence verified by biomarker 
assessments. Complete abstinence 
achieved by 12, 7 and 7 subjects, at 6, 
12 and 30 months, respectively.
d= Cohen’s d effect size statistic, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001, bold font= primary outcome 
measure.  †= data not collected or not reported
Figure 1. Depression over time (see separate file). 
Figure 1 legend: 
Figure 1 presents depression symptom data for all trials assessing depression, with % score change 
(from baseline) listed over time. For studies comparing doses between groups, only data from groups 
receiving a high dose first are presented. Y axis represents depression scores normalized to baseline 
scores (set to 100%). Psilocybin studies show BDI data, LSD study shows HADS-D data, Ayahuasca 
study shows HAM-D data. 
Accepted Article


acps_13249_f1.tif
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Accepted Article
