Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions
Michael P. Bogenschutz a,⁎, Matthew W. Johnson b
a Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, MSC11 6035, 1 University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001, USA
b Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, 5510 Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD, USA
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Addiction
Hallucinogen
LSD
Psilocybin
Substance use disorder
Treatment
Addictive disorders are very common and have devastating individual and social consequences. Currently avail-
able treatment is moderately effective at best. After many years of neglect, there is renewed interest in potential
clinical uses for classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions and other behavioral health conditions. In this
paper we provide a comprehensive review of both historical and recent clinical research on the use of classic hal-
lucinogens in the treatment of addiction, selectively review other relevant research concerning hallucinogens,
and suggest directions for future research. Clinical trial data are very limited except for the use of LSD in the
treatment of alcoholism, where a meta-analysis of controlled trials has demonstrated a consistent and clinically
signiﬁcant beneﬁcial effect of high-dose LSD. Recent pilot studies of psilocybin-assisted treatment of nicotine and
alcohol dependence had strikingly positive outcomes, but controlled trials will be necessary to evaluate the efﬁ-
cacy of these treatments. Although plausible biological mechanisms have been proposed, currently the strongest
evidence is for the role of mystical or other meaningful experiences as mediators of therapeutic effects. Classic
hallucinogens have an excellent record of safety in the context of clinical research. Given our limited understand-
ing of the clinically relevant effects of classic hallucinogens, there is a wealth of opportunities for research that
could contribute important new knowledge and potentially lead to valuable new treatments for addiction.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to provide a review and discussion of the
scientiﬁc literature pertaining to the use of classic hallucinogens in the
treatment of addiction. After highlighting the urgent need for new treat-
ments for addiction, we provide background on the history of research
on hallucinogens, a brief review of the biological and psychological
effects of classic hallucinogens, and a description of the speciﬁc classic
hallucinogens that have been studied in relation to addiction treatment.
We then provide a comprehensive review of both historical and recent
clinical research on the use of classic hallucinogens in the treatment of
addiction, selectively review existing research on possible therapeutic
mechanisms of action concerning hallucinogens, and suggest directions
for future research on the use of classic hallucinogens in the treatment
of addiction.
2. Background
2.1. The public health impact of addictions
Addictive disorders are very common, with lifetime prevalence rates
in the US population estimated at 25% for nicotine use disorder (Hughes
et al., 2006), 12% for alcohol use disorder (Hasin et al., 2007), and 10.3%
for illicit drug use disorder (Compton et al., 2007). Addiction to alcohol,
tobacco, and other drugs is the leading preventable cause of death and
disability in the United States and globally (Rehm et al., 2006). Tobacco
smoking alone causes 5 million deaths annually, including nearly a half
million in the United States (US Department of Health and Human
Services, 2014; World Health Organization, 2011). Alcohol use disorders
are among the most disabling of all diseases worldwide, and account for
12.1% of disability-adjusted life-years in men, and 4.6% in women in the
US (Rehm et al., 2009). The economic costs of substance use disorders
are enormous, over half a trillion dollars per year in the US alone, includ-
ing factors such as health care costs, lost productivity, crime, incarcera-
tion, and law enforcement (Volkow and Li, 2005).
2.2. Limitations of current treatments for addictions
A number of pharmacological and behavioral treatments have been
developed that target speciﬁc aspects of addiction including motivation,
coping skills, social support, reward, physical dependence and allostasis,
the stress response, and relapse due to exposure to conditioned cues or
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Abbreviations:5HT,5-hydroxytryptamine(=serotonin);ASI,AddictionSeverityIndex;
BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; BOLD, blood oxygen level-dependent; DMT, di-
methyltryptamine; DOI, 2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine; DOM, 2,5-dimethoxy-4-
methylamphetamine; DPT, N-N-dipropyltryptamine; FDA, Food and Drug Administration;
GDNF, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; mRNA,
messengerribonucleicacid;NAC,NativeAmericanChurch;PTSD,post-traumaticstressdis-
order; VTA, ventral tegmental area
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 505 272 8428; fax: +1 505 272 5572.
E-mail addresses: mbogenschutz@salud.unm.edu (M.P. Bogenschutz), mwj@jhu.edu
(M.W. Johnson).
PNP-08743; No of Pages 9
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002
0278-5846/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological
Psychiatry
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pnp
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002


to priming doses of the drug. However, the effects of most currently
available treatments remain disappointingly small (Berglund, 2005).
Despite the observation that 69% of United States smokers want to
quit smoking completely (Centers, for Disease Control and Prevention,
2011),with approved medications less than 35% of participants remain
smoke-free 6 months after quitting (Cahill et al., 2014). For alcohol,
the most effective FDA-approved pharmacotherapies have small to
moderate effect sizes, with approximately one person achieving absti-
nence or avoiding relapse for every 9 people treated (Rosner et al.,
2010a; Rosner et al., 2010b).
2.3. Historical background
Classic hallucinogens have been used by humans for over 5000 years
(El-Seedi et al., 2005), but scientiﬁc interest in hallucinogens dates to
the late 1800s, when mescaline was isolated and its effects were
described by Arthur Heffter (Heffter, 1896; Heffter, 1898). Following
Albert Hoffman's accidental discovery of the psychoactive effects of
LSD in 1943 (Hofmann, 1979) and isolation and synthesis of psilocybin
in 1958 (Hofmann et al., 1958a; Hofmann et al., 1958b), the 1950s
through the early 1970s saw an explosion or research on classic halluci-
nogens. Clinicians and clinical scientists explored the use of classic hal-
lucinogens to facilitate rapid therapeutic effects in alcohol and drug
addiction, as well as anxiety, depression, obsessive–compulsive disor-
der, and other conditions. LSD, psilocybin, and other hallucinogens
were legally available for clinical use as an experimental treatment
until the mid to late 1960s. Over a thousand papers document the treat-
ment of over 40,000 people with classic hallucinogens during this peri-
od (Grinspoon and Balakar, 1997). Psycholytic and psychedelic therapy
models of the 1950s through early 1970s both used hallucinogen-
assisted treatment to achieve lasting personality change, behavior
change, and symptom relief, although they emphasized different
processes in bringing about therapeutic effects(Grinspoon and Balakar,
1997; Grof, 2008). The psycholytic method used low to moderate
doses of hallucinogens, administered on multiple occasions, to facilitate
therapy that was based on traditional psychoanalytic principles
(Buckman, 1967; Leuner, 1967). The psychedelic method, rather than
emphasizing resolution of childhood conﬂicts or traumatic experiences,
used higher doses of hallucinogens, administered on one or a few
occasions, with the goal of inducing a “psychedelic,” “mystical,” or
“peak” experience, which, it was held, often induced lasting change in
habitual patterns of thought, emotional response, and behavior
(Hoffer, 1967; Sherwood et al., 1962). The primary focus of research
on the use of hallucinogenic substances in the treatment of addiction
was the use of the prototypical classic hallucinogen LSD in the treatment
of alcoholism. Treatment of alcoholism with LSD using the psychedelic
model was an accepted clinical treatment in Saskatchewan, and was
subject of numerous studies (summarized below). In reaction to the cul-
tural upheaval and concern about increasing misuse of psychedelics in
the mid and late 1960s, clinical research on hallucinogens came to halt
in the early 1970s, after enactment of the Controlled Substances Act
placed all such compounds into the highly restrictive Schedule I class.
Although there were no further addiction treatment trials with clas-
sic hallucinogens for over 30 years, the past decade has witnessed
renewed interest in this area. Early-stage clinical trials of psilocybin
for nicotine dependence (Johnson et al., 2014) and alcohol dependence
(Bogenschutz et al., 2015) have recently been completed, and further
trials are currently under way. Observational studies have suggested
that sacramental use of plant materials containing classic hallucinogens
(peyote, containing mescaline, or ayahuasca, containing DMT) suggests
that these practices are associated with decreased disordered use of
substances and few if any detrimental effects (Albaugh and Anderson,
1974b; Barbosa et al., 2012; Doering-Silveira et al., 2005; Fabregas
et al., 2010; Garrity, 2000; Halpern et al., 2005; Halpern et al., 2008;
Kunitz and Levy, 1994; Lu et al., 2009; Roy, 1973). Ayahuasca and
ibogaine are being used to treat addictions in many retreat centers
and treatment programs in Latin America and the Caribbean, but efﬁca-
cy studies have not been done. The relative safety of classic hallucino-
gens (particularly psilocybin and LSD) in clinical research settings has
been thoroughly documented. Promising research on anti-addictive
effects of the non-classic hallucinogens also suggest that therapeutic
use of classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addiction deserves an-
other look.
2.4. Neuropsychopharmacology of classic hallucinogens
2.4.1. Deﬁnition of classic hallucinogens
The research on classic hallucinogens is voluminous, and has been
reviewed
comprehensively
by
leading
scientists
in
the
ﬁeld
(Halberstadt, 2015; Nichols, 2004). Here we will brieﬂy summarize
some of the key features and actions of classic hallucinogens that are
relevant to their potential application in the treatment of addiction. De-
spite the implications of the term “hallucinogen,” these compounds
rarely occasion frank hallucinations. Nomenclature is difﬁcult because
their clinical effects are unusual. The following is one reasonable deﬁni-
tion of hallucinogens based on these effects: “A drug which, without
causing physical addiction, craving, major physiological disturbances,
delirium, disorientation, or amnesia, more or less reliably produces
thought, mood, and perceptual changes otherwise rarely experienced
except in dreams, contemplative and religious exaltation, ﬂashes of
vivid involuntary memory, and acute psychosis” (Grinspoon and
Balakar, 1997). Classic hallucinogens share the additional characteristics
that they are thought to exert their primary effects primarily through
agonist or partial agonist activity at serotonin 2A (5HT2A) receptors,
and that they substitute for the prototypical classic hallucinogen 2,5-
dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine (DOM) in drug discrimination ex-
periments (Halberstadt, 2015). There are two main structural classes
of classic hallucinogens: indoleamines and phenylalkylamines. The
indoleamines include indolealkylamines such as dimethyltryptamine
(DMT), psilocin (4-hydroxy-DMT), psilocybin (4-phosphoryloxy-
DMT), and N-N-dipropyltryptamine (DPT), and the structurally more
complex ergolines, of which lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is the
most well-known. The phenylalkylamines include mescaline and a
large number of synthetic hallucinogens including substituted amphet-
amines such as DOM and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine (DOI).
2.4.2. Basic biological mechanisms of classic hallucinogens
Classic hallucinogens bind to many serotonin receptor subtypes and
other receptor types, and binding proﬁles vary considerably among the
classic hallucinogens (Ray, 2010). However, the effects of all classic
hallucinogens appear to depend primarily on their actions at 5HT2A re-
ceptors (Glennon et al., 1984; Halberstadt, 2015; Nichols, 2004;
Vollenweider and Kometer, 2010). The 5HT2A antagonist ketanserin
blocks most of the subjective effects of psilocybin in humans, supporting
the primacy of this receptor in mediating its clinically relevant effects
(Glennon et al., 1984; Vollenweider et al., 1998). 5HT2A receptor activa-
tion is coupled to several intracellular signaling pathways (reviewed in
Halberstadt, 2015). Gq-mediated signaling activates the inositol triphos-
phate–diacylglycerol pathway leading to activation of protein kinase C.
Behavioral effects of DOI are attenuated in Gq knockout mice (Garcia
et al., 2007). Signaling through Gi/o, leading to activation of Src and
expression of the immediate early genes egr-1 and egr-2, may be neces-
sary to produce hallucinogenic effects. This pathway is activated by LSD
but not by lisuride, a non-hallucinogenic ergoline and 5HT2A agonist
structurally similar to LSD (Gonzalez-Maeso et al., 2007). The metabo-
tropic glutamate mGlu2 receptor, which forms complexes with 5HT2A
receptors, is necessary for the pharmacological and behavioral effects
of hallucinogenic 5-HT2A agonists (Gonzalez-Maeso et al., 2008;
Moreno et al., 2011). 5HT2A agonists activate sub-populations of pyra-
midal cells in cerebral cortex by enhancing glutamatergic neurotrans-
mission within intracortical networks, particularly those involving
2
M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002


cortical layer V (Aghajanian and Marek, 1999; Beique et al., 2007; Puig
et al., 2003; Zhang and Marek, 2008).
2.4.3. Acute effects of classic hallucinogens
The effects of all of the classic hallucinogens are similar, differing
principally in duration and intensity, which in turn depend on the par-
ticular substance, the dose, and the route of administration (Nichols,
2004). Signiﬁcant physiological toxicity is not seen in the doses of LSD,
psilocybin, mescaline, DPT, or DMT that are typically used. Somatic ef-
fects may include chills, tremor, unsteadiness, nausea with or without
vomiting, anorexia, xerostomia, paresthesias, and blurred vision. Pulse
and blood pressure are often mildly to moderately elevated. Sensory ef-
fects include alteration in perception of shape, size, and color, and
the illusion of movement. Vivid imagery is often perceived with
eyes closed, ranging from elementary geometric or fractal patterns
to vivid representational images of all kinds. Other sense modalities
may be altered as well, and synesthesia can occur. The sense of time
may be distorted, most commonly in the sense that time seems to
pass slowly or not at all. The psychological content and emotional
tone of the experience are unpredictable, but are thought to be inﬂu-
enced strongly by the mental state, preparation, and intention of the
person taking the drug and the environment in which the effects are
experienced, as well as the dose and the particular drug that is taken.
Effects on emotion are extremely variable, and can change rapidly
and frequently during a single episode of use. Feelings of bliss, joy,
peace, anxiety, depersonalization, derealization, and paranoia can
occur. Strong cathartic emotional experiences are common, often
related to past or current life experience. The content of the experi-
ence may be dominated by personal experiences and concerns
(e.g., conﬂicts, relationships, grief and loss), symbolic representa-
tions of a dream-like or narrative quality, or religious or spiritual
matters. Particularly in high doses, mystical-type experiences are a
frequent occurrence.
2.4.4. Relevant human neuroimaging
Recent neuroimaging studies in humans are providing insight into
the acute effects of classic hallucinogens on brain activity. An fMRI
study from Carhart-Harris and colleagues using psilocybin 2 mg IV
found that psilocybin caused acute decreases in regional cerebral
blood ﬂow and BOLD signal, with strongest effects in anterior cingulate
cortex/medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and thala-
mus (Carhart-Harris et al., 2012). Psilocybin also decreased functional
coupling between medial prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate cor-
tex. During the acute effects of psilocybin there was increased functional
connectivity between two important brain networks: the default mode
network, normally activated during internally oriented thinking, and
the task-positive network, normally activated when attention is orient-
ed toward external events or activities(Carhart-Harris et al., 2013). Fur-
ther work has shown a more general tendency for psilocybin to enhance
resting state functional connectivity between networks (Roseman et al.,
2014), and a wider range of connectivity states during psilocybin intox-
ication than in normal waking consciousness (Tagliazucchi et al., 2014).
In addition to studies of the brain at rest, evidence suggests that
psilocybin acts to increase positive affect. For example, Kometer
et al. (Kometer et al., 2012) showed that administration of psilocybin
was associated with enhanced processing of positive cues (i.e., faces,
words, and self-reported affect) and decreased processing of nega-
tive cues. Kraehenmann et al. (Kraehenmann et al., 2014) recently
reported that psilocybin administration resulted in reduced amygda-
la response to negative pictures, and that the reduced amygdala re-
sponse was signiﬁcantly correlated with increases in self-reported
positive mood. These ﬁndings are relevant to addiction treatment
because negative affect is an important predictor of relapse in addic-
tion (Connors et al., 1996).
Although these ﬁndings provide important information about the
acute effects of classic hallucinogens on brain activity, it is important
to remember that all of these studies were conducted during the acute
effects of psilocybin. Persisting effects would be more directly relevant
to therapeutic applications. There have not yet been any published stud-
ies of persisting effects of classic hallucinogen administration on brain
function in humans.
2.4.5. Classic hallucinogens that have been used in the treatment of
addiction
Among the many known classic hallucinogens, only a very few have
been studied in any detail in relation to their effects in humans. Table 1
provides information about the speciﬁc classic hallucinogens that have
been used in clinical trials of addiction or in therapeutic or religious con-
texts. Although these drugs vary widely in their structures, receptor
binding proﬁles, potency, and duration of action, they are all relatively
non-toxic, non-addictive, and similar in their subjective effects. Only
LSD, psilocybin and, to a lesser extent, DPT and mescaline have been
used in clinical trials for addiction. Mescaline was administered inter-
changeably or in combination with LSD in some of the early reports
on psychedelic treatment of alcoholism (Sherwood et al., 1962; Smith,
1958; Smith, 1959), but there are no trials speciﬁcally examining the
effects of mescaline. DMT (as an ingredient of ayahuasca, see below)
has been used extensively for hundreds or thousands of years in reli-
gious contexts, and have been used with therapeutic intent within
both religious and secular paradigms. However, its effects have not
been studied in clinical trials.
3. Clinical trials of classic hallucinogens in the treatment of
addiction
3.1. Alcoholism
3.1.1. LSD
In the 1950s through early 1970s over 30 publications reported on
the effects of LSD in the treatment of alcoholism (for reviews see
Abuzzahab and Anderson, 1971; Halpern, 1996; Mangini, 1998; Dyck,
2006; Grinspoon and Balakar, 1997). Early reports of clinical outcomes
and uncontrolled trials had variable but encouraging results, particular-
ly when the psychedelic model was used (Abuzzahab and Anderson,
1971). At least a dozen trials with some form of control group were ul-
timately conducted (Krebs and Johansen, 2012; Miller and Wilbourne,
2002), but these studies were under-powered, and results were
mixed. Research on LSD treatments stopped abruptly in the early
1970s, and the consensus had long been that the data from these studies
were too limited to warrant any conclusions as to efﬁcacy.
However, a recent meta-analysis (Krebs and Johansen, 2012) of the
6 randomized trials of LSD for alcohol dependence that reported drink-
ing outcomes (Bowen et al., 1970; Hollister et al., 1969; Ludwig et al.,
1969; Pahnke et al., 1970; Smart et al., 1966; Tomsovic and Edwards,
1970) demonstrated consistent treatment effects favoring LSD. These
studies included 325 participants who received active treatment with
LSD and 211 who received control treatment. Participants were male in-
patient alcoholics, and all of the studies employed a single high-dose
LSD session. LSD doses ranged from about 210 to 800 mcg, and control
conditions included placebo, low dose (50 mcg) LSD, ephedrine, and
amphetamine. There was great variability in preparation and debrieﬁng
of subjects and in the conditions during the LSD sessions. In the meta-
analysis, treatment effects were signiﬁcant at the ﬁrst post-treatment
follow-up, and remained signiﬁcant at 6 months. Fifty-nine % of the
LSD-treated participants were signiﬁcantly improved at the ﬁrst post-
treatment follow-up vs. 38% of the control participants (odds ratio
1.96, p = .0003). The effect was homogeneous across the 6 studies.
Although these ﬁndings are not conclusive evidence of efﬁcacy, they
suggest that renewed clinical investigation of LSD and other classic hal-
lucinogens for the treatment of alcoholism is warranted.
3
M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002


3.1.2. DPT
Limited research was also conducted on the use of dipropyltryptamine
(DPT) in the treatment of alcoholism (Grof et al., 1973; Rhead et al., 1977).
DPT is a classic hallucinogen (Fantegrossi et al., 2008), structurally
very similar to DMT, which has clinical effects lasting from 1–6 h, de-
pending on the dose, when given by intramuscular injection (Rhead
et al., 1977). In a single-group pilot study involving 51 participants,
Grof et al. reported highly signiﬁcant improvement in clinical out-
comes including abstinence among the 47 participants (92%) who
received between 1 and 6 DPT (mean 1.9) sessions and completed
follow-up at 6 months (Grof et al., 1973). A subsequent randomized
trial conducted by the same group contrasted the effects of DPT
treatment to those of “conventional treatment” (psychotherapy sim-
ilar to that received by the DPT group, but without the DPT sessions)
and “routine hospital treatment” (Rhead et al., 1977). Although post-
treatment psychological outcomes suggested more favorable
response in the DPT-treated group, there were no signiﬁcant differ-
ences between the DPT-treated participants and the other groups
in clinical outcomes assessed at 6 month follow-up, and the conven-
tional treatment group members assessed at 12 months reported
better drinking outcomes and social functioning than the other two
groups. This study suffered from a number of methodological limita-
tions including very high rates of drop-out both during treatment
and in the follow-up period (only 37% of participants assessed at
12 months), as well as differential drop-out among the groups.
3.1.3. Psilocybin
The effects of psilocybin were characterized soon after its isolation
(Isbell, 1959; Leary et al., 1963), and it was used in both psychedelic
and psycholytic models of treatment, although much less than LSD
(Metzner, 2005). However, other than very limited data published on
a cohort of alcoholic patients treated with both psilocybin and LSD
Table 1
Classic hallucinogens used in the treatment of addictions.
Chemical structurea
Human serotonin
receptor binding
(Ki, in nM)b
Clinical dose
range
Clinically relevant attributes
Clinical trials
in addiction
treatment
Other clinically relevant
data
LSD (lysergic acid
diethylamide)
5HT1A (.64–4.92)
5HT1D (14)
5HT2A (.760–21.4)
5HT2B (.977–8.91)
5HT2C (1.10–45.7)
5HT6 (2.29)
100–800 μgorally
Very high potency and
low physiological toxicity
Effects last 8–10 h.
Alcoholism,
Opioid
addiction
Trials for other indications:
pain, existential anxiety
and depression
Psilocybin
Not relevant, as
psilocybin is rapidly
converted to psilocin
in vivo.
20–40 mg orally
Psilocybin is prodrug of
psilocin.
Effects last 4–6 h.
Main drug used in recent
clinical work with classic
hallucinogens
Alcoholism,
Nicotine
addiction
Trials for other indications:
existential anxiety and
depression
Thousands of years of use
in traditional religious
contexts
Psilocin
5HT1A (49–567)
5HT1B (220)
5HT1D (36.4)
5HT1E (52.2)
5HT2A (107)
5HT2B (4.6)
5HT5 (83.7)
5HT6 (57)
5HT7 (3.5)
Subjective effects appear
to be identical to those of
psilocybin, potency slightly
higher in proportion to lower
molecular weight. Less stable
molecule than psilocybin
None
Dipropyl-
tryptamine(DPT)
5HT1A (100)
15–165 mg IM
Effects last 1–6 h, depending
on dose when given IM.
Alcoholism
Mescaline
5HT2A (150)
(rat cortex)
200–500 mg orally
Low potency, therefore lower
therapeutic index than other
classic hallucinogens, although
the therapeutic index is
nonetheless very favorable
for safe clinical use.
Alcoholism
Over 5000 years of use in
traditional religious/
shamanic contexts. Effects
similar to those of LSD.
Used interchangeably with
LSD in early psychedelic
treatment
DMT (ayahuasca)
5HT1A (120)
5HT1D (270)
5HT2A (462)
5HT6 (68)
Approx. 0.5 mg/kg
to 1.76 mg/kg
orally in ayahuasca;
0.1–0.4 mg/kg IV;
or 25 mg smoked.
Ayahuasca contains the MAOIs
harmine, harmaline,
tetrahydroharmine: these
render DMT orally active, and
may have clinically relevant
effects of their own. Effects of
ayahuasca last about 4 h. DMT
alone is inactive orally.
Smoked or injected DMT has
effects lasting about 15 min.
None
Centuries of use in
traditional religious
contexts
Current clinical
(where allowed) and
underground (where
illegal) use for addictions
and other conditions
a PubChem Compound Database: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pccompound, accessed Feb 18, 2015.
b NIMH Psychoactive Drug Screening Program (Bryan Roth, PI) Ki database: http://pdsp.med.unc.edu/pdsp.php, accessed Feb 18, 2015.
4
M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002


(Rydzyński and Gruszczyński, 1978; Rydzyński et al., 1968), we are not
aware of any published studies of psilocybin used to treat alcoholism
prior to one recently completed by one of the authors and colleagues
(Bogenschutz et al., 2015). In a single-group proof-of-concept study,
ten volunteers with DSM-IV alcohol dependence received orally admin-
istered psilocybin 0.3 mg/kg or 0.4 mg/kg in 1 or 2 supervised sessions
scheduled 4 weeks apart. Psilocybin was administered in the context
of a 12-week manualized therapy program which included Motivation-
al Enhancement Therapy and therapy sessions devoted to preparation
for and debrieﬁng from the psilocybin sessions. Participants' responses
to psilocybin were qualitatively similar to those described in other pop-
ulations, although some of the participants had a relatively mild re-
sponse to the doses used. Drinking did not decrease signiﬁcantly in
the ﬁrst 4 weeks of treatment (when participants had not yet received
psilocybin), but decreased signiﬁcantly following psilocybin adminis-
tration. Gains were largely maintained during 36 weeks of follow-up.
The intensity of self-reported effects during the ﬁrst psilocybin session
at week 4 was strongly correlated with improvement in drinking during
weeks 5–8 (r = 0.76 to r = 0.89), and with decreases in craving and in-
creases in abstinence self-efﬁcacy during week 5. Based on these prom-
ising initial results, a larger double-blind trial to investigate efﬁcacy and
mechanisms is now under way.
3.2. Treatment of illicit drug use
Although alcoholism has been the main focus of addiction treatment
using LSD, at least two studies have been conducted using LSD as com-
ponent of treatment for opioid addicts. Ludwig and Levine conducted a
study at the U.S. Public Health Service Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky
in which 70 “post-narcotic drug addicts” were randomly assigned to
receive 1 of 5 treatments (Ludwig and Levine, 1965). All participants
received a single 2–3 h therapeutic session consisting of 1) psychotherapy
using an “insight-interpretive” approach, 2) hypnotherapy (hypnosis
followed by psychotherapy, 3) LSD (0.2 mcg/kg) with no psycho-
therapeutic intervention, 4) LSD with psychotherapy, or 5) LSD
with hypnotherapy. The only outcome measure was a questionnaire
designed to measure various dimensions of psychopathology, ad-
ministered prior to the session, 2 weeks after the session, and
2 months after the session. All groups showed signiﬁcant improve-
ment on this measure at 2-month follow-up, with greater improve-
ment reported in the hypnodelic group. Drug use behavior after
discharge from the hospital was not investigated. The dose of LSD
used in this study (140 mcg for a 70 kg person) was considerably
lower than the doses used in the controlled alcohol trials summa-
rized above.
Savage and McCabe conducted a controlled trial of LSD for the treat-
ment of heroin addiction (Savage and McCabe, 1973). Seventy-eight in-
carcerated male heroin addicts eligible for parole were randomly
assigned to usual care in an outpatient, abstinence-based program, in-
cluding daily urine drug monitoring and weekly group therapy, or 4–
6 weeks of residential treatment including a psychedelic therapy,
followed by usual outpatient care. The psychedelic therapy included a
single high dose (300–500 mcg) LSD session in the context of approxi-
mately 24 h of preparatory therapy and a 1-week integration period
after the session. Participants in the psychedelic therapy condition had
higher rates of abstinence during the 12-month follow-up period (25%
vs. 5% continuous abstinence). While the design of this study does not
separate the effects of the LSD from other aspects of the residential
treatment period, the outcomes in the LSD-treated group are impressive
for drug-free treatment of severe opioid addiction.
Although there have been no further trials of classic hallucinogens in
the treatment of illicit drug addiction, such studies are now in the
planning stages. A recent publication suggested such a study would be
valuable and proposed a design to test the efﬁcacy of psilocybin for pre-
scription opioid dependence (Burdick and Adinoff, 2013). In addition, a
study was recently approved to begin evaluation of the effects of
psilocybin-assisted treatment in the treatment of cocaine dependence
(NCT02037126).
3.3. Nicotine (psilocybin)
A recent pilot study conducted by one of the authors and colleagues
showed that a manualized 15-week program of cognitive-behavior
therapy incorporating 2 or 3 psilocybin sessions (~0.29 mg/kg or
~0.43 mg/kg, administered on the target quit date and at 2 and
8 weeks post-target quit date) resulted in excellent clinical outcomes:
12 of the 15 participants (80%) were biologically conﬁrmed as
smoke-free at a 6 month follow-up (Johnson et al., 2014). Responses
to psilocybin were similar to populations previously studied
consisting of mostly non-smokers (Grifﬁths et al., 2006; Grifﬁths
et al., 2011), with 31% of sessions meeting criteria for a “complete”
mystical experience, and 40% of participants experiencing at least
one psychologically challenging experience. Aside from these acute
psychologically challenging experiences which were well managed,
no clinically signiﬁcant adverse events occurred during the study.
Moreover, consistent with previous ﬁndings showing an important
role of the nature of subjective experience occasioned by psilocybin,
smoking cessation outcomes were signiﬁcantly correlated with
measures of mystical experience during sessions, and retrospective
ratings of personal meaning and spiritual signiﬁcance of psilocybin
sessions (Garcia-Romeu et al., 2015).
4. Supportive non-experimental data from religious and clinical
contexts
Although ayahuasca and peyote have not been subjected to
clinical trials, they are of interest because they contain classic
hallucinogen compounds, and they have been and continue to
be used extensively outside of clinical research, including current
use with the intent of curtailing addiction. We brieﬂy summarize
the most relevant non-experimental research on these substances
below.
4.1. Ayahuasca
Ayahuasca is a hallucinogenic tea containing the classic hallucinogen
DMT and beta carbolines (monoamine oxidase inhibitors that render
DMT orally active (McKenna et al., 1984; Callaway et al., 1996)).
Ayahuasca has been used by indigenous peoples of the Amazon basin
for centuries, and is used sacramentally by a number of organized reli-
gions, of which the União do Vegetal and Santo Daime are the best
known (McKenna, 2007).
Cross-sectional studies have consistently shown decreased rates of
alcohol misuse among members of both Brazilian and US religious
sects using ayahuasca (Doering-Silveira et al., 2005; Halpern et al.,
2008). In an assessment of mental health among ritual users of ayahua-
sca, Fabregas found that ayahuasca users had lower scores on the Addic-
tion Severity Index (ASI) alcohol use and psychiatric subscales
compared to a control group (Fabregas et al., 2010). Halpern et al.
interviewed 34 American Santo Daime members regarding effects of
church participation (Halpern et al., 2008). Participants reported a
wide variety of psychological beneﬁts. Of 24 members with a history
of substance use disorder, 22 were in full remission, and all 5 who had
a history of alcohol dependence reported that church involvement
played a pivotal role in their recovery. Although proscription of alcohol
and other drug use within these religions likely contributes to such ef-
fects, the consistency of results and individuals' accounts regarding
the sacramental substance suggests the possibility of a pharmacological
effect as well.
Ayahuasca is currently being used in treatment centers and in
shamanic or “neo-shamanic” contexts for the treatment of various
conditions including addiction and PTSD, as well as for purposes of
5
M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002


personal or spiritual growth (Labate and Cavnar, 2011; Liester and
Prickett, 2012). Although many individuals have reported that
ayahuasca has facilitated their recovery from addiction, to our
knowledge only one observational study has been published (Thomas
et al., 2013), and controlled trials have not been conducted. A recent
study showed that ayahuasca speciﬁcally blocked acquisition and rein-
statement of behavioral sensitization to alcohol in mice (Oliveira-Lima
et al., 2015).
4.2. Peyote
The peyote cactus (Lophophora williamsii), the San Pedro Cactus
(Trichocereus pachanoi) and a number of other cacti contain psychoac-
tive quantities of the classic hallucinogen mescaline and other related
alkaloids (Gabermann, 1978; Ogunbodede et al., 2010). Peyote buttons
have been harvested by Native peoples in North America for at least
5500 years (El-Seedi et al., 2005). Today peyote is used sacramentally
by groups including the Native American Church (NAC) (Stewart,
1987) and the Huichol of northern Mexico (Meyerhoff, 1974). It has
often been stated that taking peyote in the context of NAC ceremonies
helps alcoholics achieve and maintain sobriety (Albaugh and Anderson,
1974b; Garrity, 2000; Kunitz and Levy, 1994; Lu et al., 2009). Proposed
psychological mechanism includes emotional catharsis (Albaugh and
Anderson, 1974a) and improved self-understanding and motivation for
sobriety (Garrity, 2000). However, there are no published quantitative
studies of alcohol use among NAC members.
5. Possible mechanisms of action
Since there are very few studies directly investigating the role of spe-
ciﬁc effects of classic hallucinogens in subsequent change in addictive be-
havior, this section is necessarily speculative. Still, we feel it is important
to identify plausible mechanisms of action at the current early stage of in-
vestigation in order to generate hypotheses for future research. There are
several known actions of classic hallucinogens that are related to mecha-
nisms of addiction, and could possibly mediate anti-addictive effects.
5.1. The possible role of 5HT2A receptor modulation
In rat models, administration of classic hallucinogens induces down-
regulation of 5HT2A receptors, particularly those in the anterior
cingulate and frontomedial cortex, leading to the rapid development
of behavioral tolerance (Buckholtz et al., 1990; Gresch et al., 2005).
The rapid development of tolerance to most classic hallucinogens in
humans (Nichols, 2004) suggests that 5HT2A receptors may be down-
regulated, although the latter has not been demonstrated in humans.
Such down-regulation would be behaviorally relevant. Increased
5HT2A receptor binding has been reported in people with depression
(Shelton et al., 2009), neuroticism (Frokjaer et al., 2008), borderline per-
sonality disorder (Soloff et al., 2007), impulsive aggression (Rosell et al.,
2010), and completed suicide (Anisman et al., 2008). Furthermore,
fronto-limbic 5HT2A receptor density is positively correlated with in-
creased anxiety and exaggerated stress response (Frokjaer et al.,
2008). Given that anxiety and stress are important triggers for relapse
to substance use (Sinha and Li, 2007), it is possible that 5HT2A receptor
downregulation by classical hallucinogens could alter and diminish
stress-induced substance relapse. Furthermore, increased activity in
5HT2A-mediated pathways relative to 5HT2C pathways is associated
with increased response disinhibition and cue response and in rat
models of cocaine addiction (Cunningham and Anastasio, 2014). The
5HT2A antagonists ritanserin and amperozide suppress alcohol
consumption in animal models (Johnson, 2008). However, in humans
alcoholism is not consistently associated with change in 5HT2A receptor
levels (Thompson et al., 2012; Underwood et al., 2008), and the 5HT2A
antagonist ritanserin did not improve drinking outcomes in people with
alcohol dependence in two large-scale clinical trials (Johnson et al.,
1996; Wiesbeck et al., 1999).
5.2. Neurotrophic factors and induction of neuroplasticity
Classic hallucinogens have effects on expression of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic fac-
tor (GDNF), neurotrophic factors which are relevant to addiction and
other psychiatric disorders. BDNF and GDNF play critical roles in
neurogenesis, synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory (Ghitza et al.,
2010). DOI increases expression of BDNF mRNA in rat parietal cortex
and other neocortical regions through its action at the 5HT2A receptor,
but decreases BDNF expression in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus
(Vaidya et al., 1997). DOI can also increase expression of mRNA of GDNF
through its action at 5HT2A receptors (Tsuchioka et al., 2008). BDNF and
GDNF can facilitate or inhibit addictive behaviors in rats depending on
the drug type and anatomical site of action, and the speciﬁc behavioral
model being used (Ghitza et al., 2010). In the case of alcohol, the
experimental data demonstrate a consistent pattern in that self-
administration of alcohol and conditioned place preference are inverse-
ly related to level of BDNF or GDNF expression (Ghitza et al., 2010). Re-
garding cocaine, the picture is much more complicated. In the ventral
tegmental area (VTA), BDNF increases drug reward, while GDNF de-
creases reward. Both BDNF and GDNF in the VTA potentiate relapse
after withdrawal from cocaine. BDNF activity in the nucleus accumbens
also facilitates cocaine seeking, but BDNF signaling in the medial pre-
frontal cortex diminishes cocaine seeking. There is some evidence that
classic hallucinogens can induce neuroplastic changes, suggesting a
possible biological basis for persisting behavioral change. Through its
action at 5HT2A receptors DOI induces remodeling of pyramidal cell
dendrites (Jones et al., 2009). The effects of classic hallucinogens on
adult neurogenesis have not been established, although a recent publi-
cation began to explore these effects (Catlow et al., 2013). Clearly, much
more work is needed to understand the region-speciﬁc effects of classic
hallucinogens on neurotrophic factor expression and neuroplasticity,
and the impact of these changes on addiction-related behaviors.
5.3. The role of subjective experience
Clinical work with classic hallucinogens has emphasized the central
role of the patient's conscious experience during the drug's acute effects
(Grof, 2008; Hoffer, 1967; Masters and Houston, 2000; Pahnke et al.,
1970; Sherwood et al., 1962). Most of the clinical studies conducted in
North America using LSD in the treatment of addiction or existential
anxiety in terminal cancer during the 1950s–1970s employed the psy-
chedelic model described in Section 2.3. The idea that a mystical-type
experience can lead to lasting behavior change is consonant with the
concept of “spiritual awakening” in the context of Alcoholics Anony-
mous (Forcehimes, 2004). Indeed, based on his own LSD experiences
Bill Wilson, the founder of Alcoholics Anonymous, became an enthusi-
astic proponent of the use of LSD to help alcoholics experience spiritual
insight (Kurtz, 2008). However, past studies of addiction treatment with
classic hallucinogens have not assessed participants' experiences quan-
titatively or investigated the mediational role of dimensions of the expe-
rience. As noted above, recent pilot work with psilocybin for cigarette
addiction demonstrated that strong mystical-type experiences were as-
sociated with greater improvement (Garcia-Romeu et al., 2015). On the
other hand, in the recent pilot study of psilocybin for alcohol depen-
dence, both mystical experience and broader measures of the intensity
of subjective effects were associated with improvement in drinking
(Bogenschutz et al., 2015).
5.4. Persisting psychological changes
A number of persisting psychological changes have been proposed
as possible mediators of effects of classic hallucinogens in the treatment
6
M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002


of addiction (Bogenschutz and Pommy, 2012). The published pilot stud-
ies of psilocybin for alcohol or nicotine dependence have reported de-
creases in craving and increases in self-efﬁcacy (Bogenschutz et al.,
2015; Johnson et al., 2014). Long-term follow-up of normal volunteers
who received psilocybin demonstrated increase in the personality di-
mension of openness, predicted by the intensity of mystical experience
(Maclean et al., 2011). Positive behavior change and improvement in
well-being and life satisfaction have also been reported (Grifﬁths
et al., 2011). Controlled trials have not yet been conducted that would
allow rigorous testing of such possible mediators of therapeutic effects.
6. Safety
The potential for classic hallucinogens in addiction treatment re-
quires an understanding of risks and safety mechanisms to minimize
potential harms. A broad exploration of risks and proposed safety issues
has been previously described (Johnson et al., 2008). However, a brief
description will be provided here.
6.1. Domains of risk
Although classic hallucinogens can be used in dangerous ways in
non-clinical settings, they do not normally engender compulsive drug-
seeking (addiction) as with most abused drugs (e.g., opioids, cocaine,
methamphetamine, cannabis) (Fantegrossi et al., 2008; O'Brien, 2010).
It appears that non-medical use of classic hallucinogens can precipitate
prolonged psychiatric reactions (e.g., psychosis) in rare cases, although
prolonged psychiatric reactions have very rarely been observed in med-
ical settings (Cohen, 1960; McGlothlin and Arnold, 1971). Given the in-
tensity of their subjective effects, it is remarkable that classic
hallucinogens have very low physiological toxicity, with no evidence
of resulting organ damage or neuropsychological deﬁcits even at very
high doses (Gable, 1993; Strassman, 1984). On rare occasions, nonmed-
ical use of classic hallucinogens appears to result in clinically distressing
persisting perceptual abnormalities (e.g., hallucinogen persisting per-
ception disorder, HPPD). However such cases have not been observed
in clinical research, and are perhaps related to factors absent in research
settings (e.g., poor control of dose, polydrug use) (Johnson et al., 2008).
For the large majority of participants, the most relevant safety concern is
the potential for dangerous and erratic behavior given the intense sub-
jective experiences possible with classic hallucinogens, including fear
and anxiety.
6.2. Safeguards against risks
The risks of classic hallucinogen administration can be appropriately
addressed with procedures, resulting in risk/beneﬁt ratios in both basic
human research and therapeutic studies that compare favorably with
routine procedures in medical research and therapeutic practice
(Johnson et al., 2008). Given clinical cases in which non-medical use
of classic hallucinogens appeared to have precipitated prolonged psy-
chiatric reactions (e.g., psychosis), participants should be screened and
excluded for psychotic disorders (and related disorders such a bipolar
disorder) or a predisposition to these disorders. A physician should be
on call and immediately available during the drug administration ses-
sions, and appropriate rescue medication (e.g., benzodiazepines, antihy-
pertensives) should be available for administration, although such
medications are rarely needed. Interpersonal reassurance is typically
effective in dealing with challenging psychological reactions (Johnson
et al., 2008). As the most likely risks are associated with behavior during
acute drug administration, it is important that volunteers meet with re-
search/clinical staff during preparatory meetings to develop rapport
(minimizing paranoia regarding staff in sessions) and to prepare the
volunteer for dealing with potentially powerful drug effects. During
sessions, multiple individuals who have developed rapport should
participate in monitoring the volunteer, so that the volunteer is
never alone while experiencing acute drug effects, even if one leaves
temporarily. Regardless of experimental or therapeutic intentions of
studies, classic hallucinogen administration can occasion extremely
salient and emotional experiences that may relate to one's past or
current personal or family history, philosophical issues, and some-
times experiences described as spiritual in nature. It is important
for volunteers to have follow-up contact with treatment staff in
order to discuss and process such experiences. This contact serves
as an opportunity to refer to the volunteer to additional care should
that appear appropriate.
7. Conclusions/future directions
Taken as a whole, the evidence suggests that classic hallucinogens
hold considerable promise in the treatment of addiction, particularly
given the limited efﬁcacy of extant treatments. The efﬁcacy data are
promising, but very limited except in the case of LSD treatment of
alcoholism. Trials are only now beginning that will meet modern stan-
dards of design and statistical power. Classic hallucinogens have several
features that one might want a priori in an anti-addiction drug. 1) They
lack addictive effects themselves. 2) Extensive clinical research has
shown them to be safe when appropriate precautions are taken.
3) They have molecular targets consistent with anti-addiction effects.
4) They occasion psychological effects that include intense self-
reﬂection and sometimes mystical/spiritual/peak experience that are
often associated with naturalistic addiction recovery. 5) They can in-
duce persisting changes in behavior and personality, while for most
medications it is expected that medication effects will only persist as
long as the patient is taking the medication.
Although plausible biological mechanisms have been proposed, at
this point the strongest evidence is for the role of mystical or other
meaningful experiences as mediators of therapeutic effects. This is a
unique mechanism among pharmacotherapies, and one that is fascinat-
ing from both biological and psychological perspectives. One process
that bears some resemblance to this process is the pathogenesis of
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In PTSD, an overwhelming psy-
chological trauma can cause persisting harmful changes in brain struc-
ture and function, as well as sometimes permanent psychological
change. It has therefore been proposed that mystical experiences
occasioned by classic hallucinogens constitute inverse-PTSD-like effects
(Garcia-Romeu et al., 2015). “PTSD-like” refers to the lasting behavioral
effects of discrete experiences. “Inverse” implies that persisting effects
are beneﬁcial rather than pathological. Although at this point we cannot
say whether the neurobiology of these phenomena is related in speciﬁc
ways, both situations could represent special forms of learning and
memory in which the brain changes much more substantially than dur-
ing a single ordinary experience.
Based on our limited understanding of the effects of classic halluci-
nogens in addiction, there are many avenues of research that could con-
tribute important new knowledge and potentially lead to valuable new
treatments. Further efﬁcacy trials with psilocybin, and other classic
hallucinogens (especially LSD) for alcohol, nicotine, cocaine, and opioids
should be developed. Although the effects of psilocybin to date have
been quite impressive, it cannot be assumed that all classic hallucino-
gens have the same clinical effects. Multiple agents should be studied.
Research should also investigate whether efﬁcacy depends on the
presence and nature of concurrent psycho/social treatment accompany-
ing classic hallucinogen treatment (e.g., cognitive-behavior therapy,
Motivational Enhancement Therapy). More work needs to be done on
mechanisms of action, e.g., psychological mediators and persisting psy-
chological change, neuroimaging studies of persisting effects, other bio-
markers, and the possible role of genetics in moderating response to
psychedelics. Further thought should be given to optimizing the inte-
gration of the classic hallucinogen treatment with psychosocial treat-
ments, and possibly with other medications. Previous and current
methods have minimized the number of doses (sessions) provided. If
7
M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002


one or two sessions are effective, additional “booster” sessions might or
might not further improve outcomes. Finally, since all drugs have risks,
continued attention to safety is critical, including optimizing screening,
preparation, use of ancillary medications, and debrieﬁng and follow-up
following sessions.
References
Abuzzahab Sr FS, Anderson BJ. A review of LSD treatment in alcoholism. Int
Pharmacopsychiatry 1971;6:223–35.
Aghajanian GK, Marek GJ. Serotonin, via 5-HT2A receptors, increases EPSCs in layer V
pyramidal cells of prefrontal cortex by an asynchronous mode of glutamate release.
Brain Res 1999;825:161–71.
Albaugh B, Anderson P. Peyote in the treatment of alcoholism among American Indians.
Am J Psychiatry 1974a;131:4.
Albaugh BJ, Anderson PO. Peyote in the treatment of alcoholism among American Indians.
Am J Psychiatry 1974b;131:1247–50.
Anisman H, Du L, Palkovits M, Faludi G, Kovacs GG, Szontagh-Kishazi P, et al. Serotonin
receptor subtype and p11 mRNA expression in stress-relevant brain regions of
suicide and control subjects. J Psychiatry Neurosci 2008;33:131–41.
Barbosa PC, Mizumoto S, Bogenschutz MP, Strassman RJ. Health status of ayahuasca users.
Drug Test Anal 2012;4:601–9.
Beique JC, Imad M, Mladenovic L, Gingrich JA, Andrade R. Mechanism of the 5-
hydroxytryptamine 2A receptor-mediated facilitation of synaptic activity in prefron-
tal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:9870–5.
Berglund M. A better widget? Three lessons for improving addiction treatment from a
meta-analytical study. Addiction 2005;100:742–50.
Bogenschutz MP, Pommy JM. Therapeutic mechanisms of classic hallucinogens in the
treatment of addictions: from indirect evidence to testable hypotheses. Drug Test
Anal 2012;4:543–55.
Bogenschutz MP, Forcehimes AA, Pommy JA, Wilcox CE, Barbosa P, Strassman RJ.
Psilocybin-assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: a proof-of-concept study. J
Psychopharmacol 2015;29(3):289–99.
Bowen WT, Soskin RA, Chotlos JW. Lysergic acid diethylamide as a variable in the hospital
treatment of alcoholism: a follow-up study. J Nerv Ment Dis 1970;150:111–8.
Buckholtz NS, Zhou DF, Freedman DX, Potter WZ. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
administration selectively downregulates serotonin2 receptors in rat brain.
Neuropsychopharmacology 1990;3:137–48.
Buckman J. Theroetical aspects of LSD therapy. In: Abramson HA, editor. The use of LSD in
psychotherapy and alcoholism. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill; 1967.
Burdick BV, Adinoff B. A proposal to evaluate mechanistic efﬁcacy of hallucinogens in
addiction treatment. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 2013;39:291–7.
Cahill K, Stevens S, Lancaster T. Pharmacological treatments for smoking cessation. JAMA
2014;311:193–4.
Callaway JC, Raymon LP, Hearn WL, McKenna DJ, Grob CS, Brito GS, et al. Quantitation of
N,N-dimethyltryptamine and harmala alkaloids in human plasma after oral dosing
with ayahuasca. J Anal Toxicol 1996;20:492–7.
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams T, Stone JM, Reed LJ, Colasanti A, et al. Neural cor-
relates of the psychedelic state as determined by fMRI studies with psilocybin. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:2138–43.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Erritzoe D, Williams TM, Stone JM, Evans J, et al. Functional
connectivity measures after psilocybin inform a novel hypothesis of early psychosis.
Schizophr Bull 2013;39(6):1343–51.
Catlow BJ, Song S, Paredes DA, Kirstein CL, Sanchez-Ramos J. Effects of psilocybin on hip-
pocampal neurogenesis and extinction of trace fear conditioning. Exp Brain Res 2013;
228:481–91.
Centers, for Disease Control and Prevention. Quitting smoking among adults—United
States, 2001–2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011;60:1513–9.
Cohen S. Lysergic acid diethylamide: side effects and complications. J Nerv Ment Dis 1960;
130:30–40.
Compton WM, Thomas YF, Stinson FS, Grant BF. Prevalence, correlates, disability, and co-
morbidity of DSM-IV drug abuse and dependence in the United States: results from
the national epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related conditions. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2007;64:566–76.
Connors GJ, Maisto SA, Donovan DM. Conceptualizations of relapse: a summary of
psychological and psychobiological models. Addiction 1996;91(Suppl.):S5–S13.
Cunningham KA, Anastasio NC. Serotonin at the nexus of impulsivity and cue reactivity in
cocaine addiction. Neuropharmacology 2014;76:460–78. [Pt B].
Doering-Silveira E, Grob CS, De Rios MD, Lopez E, Alonso LK, Tacla C, et al. Report on
psychoactive drug use among adolescents using ayahuasca within a religious context.
J Psychoactive Drugs 2005;37:141–4.
Dyck E. ‘Hitting highs at rock bottom’: LSD treatment for alcoholism, 1950–1970. Soc Hist
Med 2006;19:313–29.
El-Seedi HR, De Smet PA, Beck O, Possnert G, Bruhn JG. Prehistoric peyote use: alkaloid
analysis and radiocarbon dating of archaeological specimens of Lophophora from
Texas. J Ethnopharmacol 2005;101:238–42.
Fabregas JM, Gonzalez D, Fondevila S, Cutchet M, Fernandez X, Barbosa PC, et al. Assess-
ment of addiction severity among ritual users of ayahuasca. Drug Alcohol Depend
2010;111:257–61.
Fantegrossi WE, Murnane KS, Reissig CJ. The behavioral pharmacology of hallucinogens.
Biochem Pharmacol 2008;75:17–33.
Forcehimes AA. De profundis: spiritual transformations in Alcoholics Anonymous. J Clin
Psychol 2004;60:503–17.
Frokjaer VG, Mortensen EL, Nielsen FA, Haugbol S, Pinborg LH, Adams KH, et al.
Frontolimbic serotonin 2A receptor binding in healthy subjects is associated with
personality risk factors for affective disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2008;63:569–76.
Gabermann V. Estimation of mescaline and pellotine in Lophophora coulter plants
(Cactaceae) by means of the oscillographic polarography. Biokhimiia 1978;43:
246–51.
Gable RS. Toward a comparative overview of dependence potential and acute toxicity of
psychoactive substances used nonmedically. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 1993;19:
263–81.
Garcia EE, Smith RL, Sanders-Bush E. Role of G(q) protein in behavioral effects of the hal-
lucinogenic drug 1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane. Neuropharma-
cology 2007;52:1671–7.
Garcia-Romeu A, Grifﬁths RR, Johnson MW. Psilocybin-occasioned mystical experiences
in the treatment of tobacco addiction. Curr Drug Abuse Rev 2015;7(3):157–64.
Garrity JF. Jesus, peyote, and the holy people: alcohol abuse and the ethos of power in
Navajo healing. Med Anthropol Q 2000;14:521–42.
Ghitza UE, Zhai H, Wu, Airavaara, M., Shaham, Y. & Lu, L. P. Role of BDNF and GDNF in drug
reward and relapse: a review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2010;35:157–71.
Glennon RA, Titeler M, Mckenney JD. Evidence for 5-HT2 involvement in the mechanism
of action of hallucinogenic agents. Life Sci 1984;35:2505–11.
Gonzalez-Maeso J, Weisstaub NV, Zhou M, Chan P, Ivic L, Ang R, et al. Hallucinogens
recruit speciﬁc cortical 5-HT(2A) receptor-mediated signaling pathways to affect
behavior. Neuron 2007;53:439–52.
Gonzalez-Maeso J, Ang RL, Yuen T, Chan P, Weisstaub NV, Lopez-Gimenez JF, et al. Iden-
tiﬁcation of a serotonin/glutamate receptor complex implicated in psychosis. Nature
2008;452:93–7.
Gresch PJ, Smith RL, Barrett RJ, Sanders-Bush E. Behavioral tolerance to lysergic acid
diethylamide is associated with reduced serotonin-2A receptor signaling in rat
cortex. Neuropsychopharmacology 2005;30:1693–702.
Grifﬁths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type expe-
riences having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual signiﬁcance.
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2006;187:268–83. [discussion 284–92].
Grifﬁths RR, Johnson MW, Richards WA, Richards BD, McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin
occasioned mystical-type experiences: immediate and persisting dose-related effects.
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2011;218:649–65.
Grinspoon L, Balakar JB. Psychedelic drugs reconsidered. New York: The Lindesmith
Center; 1997.
Grof S. LSD psychotherapy. Ben Lomond, CA: Multidisciplnary Association for Psychedelic
Studies; 2008.
Grof S, Soskin RA, Richards WA, Kurland AA. DPT as an adjunct in psychotherapy of
alcoholics. Int Pharmacopsychiatry 1973;8:104–15.
Halberstadt AL. Recent advances in the neuropsychopharmacology of serotonergic hallu-
cinogens. Behav Brain Res 2015;277:99–120.
Halpern JH. The use of hallucinogens in the treatment of addiction. Addict Res 1996;4:
177–89.
Halpern JH, Sherwood AR, Hudson JI, Yurgelun-Todd D, Pope HG. Psychological and cog-
nitive effects of long-term peyote use among Native Americans. Biol Psychiatry 2005;
58:624–31.
Halpern JH, Sherwood AR, Passie T, Blackwell KC, Ruttenber AJ. Evidence of health and
safety in American members of a religion who use a hallucinogenic sacrament. Med
Sci Monit 2008;14:SR15–22.
Hasin DS, Stinson FS, Ogburn E, Grant BF. Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbid-
ity of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence in the United States: results from the
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2007;64:830–42.
Heffter A. Ueber Cacteenalkaloïde. Ber Dtsch Chem Ges 1896;29:216–27.
Heffter A. Ueber Pellote - Beiträge zur chemischen und pharmakologischen Kenntniss der
Cacteen Zweite Mittheilung. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1898;40:
385–429.
Hoffer A. A program for treatment of alcoholism: LSD, malvaria, and nicotinic acid. In:
Abramson HA, editor. The use of LSD in psychotherapy and alcoholism. Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill; 1967.
Hofmann A. How LSD originated. J Psychedelic Drugs 1979;11:53–60.
Hofmann A, Frey A, Ott H, Petrzilka T, Troxler F. Konstitutionsaufkl rung und Synthese von
Psilocybin. Experientia 1958a;14:397–401.
Hofmann A, Heim R, Brack A, Kobel H. Psilocybin ein psychotroper Wirkstoff aus dem
mexikanischen Rauschpilz. Rev Mycologie 1958b;22:17–21.
Hollister LE, Shelton J, Krieger G. A controlled comparison of lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD) and dextroamphetmine in alcoholics. Am J Psychiatry 1969;125:1352–7.
Hughes JR, Helzer JE, Lindberg SA. Prevalence of DSM/ICD-deﬁned nicotine dependence.
Drug Alcohol Depend 2006;85:91–102.
Isbell H. Comparison of the reactions induced by psilocybin and LSD-25 in man.
Psychopharmacologia 1959;1:29–38.
Johnson BA. Update on neuropharmacological treatments for alcoholism: scientiﬁc basis
and clinical ﬁndings. Biochem Pharmacol 2008;75:34–56.
Johnson BA, Jasinski DR, Galloway GP, Kranzler H, Weinreib R, Anton RF, et al. Ritanserin
in the treatment of alcohol dependence—a multi-center clinical trial. Ritanserin Study
Group. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 1996;128:206–15.
Johnson M, Richards W, Grifﬁths R. Human hallucinogen research: guidelines for safety. J
Psychopharmacol 2008;22:603–20.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, Grifﬁths RR. Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR
agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. J Psychopharmacol 2014;
28(11):983–92.
Jones KA, Srivastava DP, Allen JA, Strachan RT, Roth BL, Penzes P. Rapid modulation of
spine morphology by the 5-HT2A serotonin receptor through kalirin-7 signaling.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:19575–80.
8
M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002


Kometer M, Schmidt A, Bachmann R, Studerus E, Seifritz E, Vollenweider FX. Psilocybin
biases facial recognition, goal-directed behavior, and mood state toward positive
relative to negative emotions through different serotonergic subreceptors. Biol
Psychiatry 2012;72(11):898–906.
Kraehenmann R, Preller KH, Scheidegger M, Pokorny T, Bosch OG, Seifritz E, et al.
Psilocybin-induced decrease in amygdala reactivity correlates with enhanced
positive mood in healthy volunteers. Biol Psychiatry 2014 Apr 26. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.04.010. pii: S0006-3223(14)00275-3, [Epub ahead of print].
Krebs TS, Johansen PO. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for alcoholism: meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. J Psychopharmacol 2012;26(7):994–1002.
Kunitz SJ, Levy JE. Drinking careers: a twenty-ﬁve year study of three Navajo populations.
New Haven: Yale University Press; 1994.
Kurtz E. Drugs and the spiritual: Bill W. Takes LSD. In: Kurtz E, editor. The collected Ernie
Kurtz. New York: Authors Choice; 2008.
Labate BC, Cavnar C. The expansion of the ﬁeld of research on ayahuasca: some reﬂections
about the ayahuasca track at the 2010 MAPS “Psychedelic Science in the 21st
Century” conference. Int J Drug Policy 2011;22:174–8.
Leary T, Litwin GH, Metzner R. Reactions to psilocybin administered in a supportive envi-
ronment. J Nerv Ment Dis 1963;137:561–73.
Leuner H. Present state of psycholytic therapy and its possibilities. In: Abramson HA, ed-
itor. The use of LSD in psychotherapy and alcoholism. Bobbs-Merrill: Indianapolis;
1967.
Liester MB, Prickett JI. Hypotheses regarding the mechanisms of ayahuasca in the treat-
ment of addictions. J Psychoactive Drugs 2012;44:200–8.
Lu L, Liu Y, Zhu W, Shi J, Liu Y, Ling W, Kosten T. Traditional medicine in the treatment of
drug addiction. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 2009;35:11.
Ludwig AM, Levine J. A controlled comparison of ﬁve brief treatment techniques
employing LSD, hypnosis, and psychotherapy. Am J Psychother 1965;19:417–35.
Ludwig A, Levine J, Stark L, Lazar R. A clinical study of LSD treatment in alcoholism. Am J
Psychiatry 1969;126:59–69.
Maclean KA, Johnson MW, Grifﬁths RR. Mystical experiences occasioned by the hallucino-
gen psilocybin lead to increases in the personality domain of openness. J
Psychopharmacol 2011;25:1453–61.
Mangini M. Treatment of alcoholism using psychedelic drugs: a review of the program of
research. J Psychoactive Drugs 1998;30:381–418.
Masters R, Houston J. The varieties of psychedelic experience: the classic guide to the ef-
fects of LSD on the human psyche. Rochester, Vermont: Park Street Press; 2000.
Mcglothlin WH, Arnold DO. LSD revisited. A ten-year follow-up of medical LSD use. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 1971;24:35–49.
Mckenna DJ. The healing vine: ayahuasca as medicine in the 21st century. In: Winkelman
MJ, Roberts TB, editors. Psychedelic medicine: new evidence for hallucinogenic sub-
stances as treatments, vol. 1. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers/Greenwood Publishing
Group; 2007.
McKenna DJ, Towers GH, Abbott F. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors in South American hal-
lucinogenic plants: tryptamine and beta-carboline constituents of ayahuasca. J
Ethnopharmacol 1984;10:195–223.
Metzner R. Sacred mushroom of visions: Teonanácatl: a sourcebook on the psilocybin
mushroom. Rochester, Vermont: Park. St. Press; 2005.
Meyerhoff B. Peyote hunt. Ithaca, NY: Cornell; 1974.
Miller WR, Wilbourne PL. Mesa Grande: a methodological analysis of clinical trials of
treatments for alcohol use disorders. Addiction 2002;97:265–77.
Moreno JL, Holloway T, Albizu L, Sealfon SC, Gonzalez-Maeso J. Metabotropic glutamate
mGlu2 receptor is necessary for the pharmacological and behavioral effects induced
by hallucinogenic 5-HT2A receptor agonists. Neurosci Lett 2011;493:76–9.
Nichols DE. Hallucinogens. Pharmacol Ther 2004;101:131–81.
O'Brien CP. Chapter 24: drug addiction. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological basis
of therapeutics; 2010.
Ogunbodede O, Mccombs D, Trout K, Daley P, Terry M. New mescaline concentrations
from 14 taxa/cultivars of Echinopsis spp. (Cactaceae) (“San Pedro”) and their rele-
vance to shamanic practice. J Ethnopharmacol 2010;131:356–62.
Oliveira-Lima AJ, Santos R, Hollais AW, Gerardi-Junior CA, Baldaia MA, Wuo-Silva R, et al.
Effects of ayahuasca on the development of ethanol-induced behavioral sensitization
and on a post-sensitization treatment in mice. Physiol Behav 2015;142C:28–36.
Pahnke WN, Kurland AA, Unger S, Savage C, Grof S. The experimental use of psychedelic
(LSD) psychotherapy. JAMA 1970;212:1856–63.
Puig MV, Celada P, Az-Mataix L. In vivo modulation of the activity of pyramidal neurons in
the rat medial prefrontal cortex by 5-HT2A receptors: relationship to thalamocortical
afferents. Cereb Cortex 2003;13:870–82.
Ray TS. Psychedelics and the human receptorome. PLoS One 2010;5:e9019.
Rehm J, Taylor B, Room R. Global burden of disease from alcohol, illicit drugs and tobacco.
Drug Alcohol Rev 2006;25:503–13.
Rehm J, Mathers C, Popova S, Thavorncharoensap M, Teerawattananon Y, Patra J. Global
burden of disease and injury and economic cost attributable to alcohol use and
alcohol-use disorders. Lancet 2009;373:2223–33.
Rhead JC, Soskin RA, Turek I, Richards WA, Yensen R, Kurland AA, et al. Psychedelic drug
(DPT)-assisted psychotherapy with alcoholics: a controlled study. J Psychedelic Drugs
1977;9:287–300.
Rosell DR, Thompson JL, Slifstein M, Xu X, Frankle WG, New AS, et al. Increased serotonin
2A receptor availability in the orbitofrontal cortex of physically aggressive personality
disordered patients. Biol Psychiatry 2010;67:1154–62.
Roseman L, Leech R, Feilding A, Nutt DJ, Carhart-Harris RL. The effects of psilocybin and
MDMA on between-network resting state functional connectivity in healthy
volunteers. Front Hum Neurosci 2014;8:204.
Rosner S, Hackl-Herrwerth A, Leucht S, Vecchi S, Srisurapanont M, Soyka M. Opioid
antagonists for alcohol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010a:CD001867.
Rosner S, Hackl-Herrwerth A, Leucht S, Lehert P, Vecchi S, Soyka M. Acamprosate for alco-
hol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010b:CD004332.
Roy C. Indian peyotists and alcohol. Am J Psychiatry 1973;130:329–30.
Rydzyński Z, Gruszczyński W. Treatment of alcoholism with psychotomimetic drugs. A
follow-up study. Act Nerv Super (Praha) 1978;20:81–2.
Rydzyński Z, Cwyna RS, Grzelak L, Jagiello W. Prelminary report on the experience with
psychosomimetic drugs in the treatment of alcobolism. Act Nerv Super (Praha)
1968;10:273.
Savage C, McCabe OL. Residential psychedelic (LSD) therapy for the narcotic addict. A
controlled study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1973;28:808–14.
Shelton RC, Sanders-Bush E, Manier DH, Lewis DA. Elevated 5-HT 2A receptors in post-
mortem prefrontal cortex in major depression is associated with reduced activity of
protein kinase A. Neuroscience 2009;158:1406–15.
Sherwood JN, Stolaroff MJ, Harman WW. The psychedelic experience—a new concept in
psychotherapy. J Neuropsychiatr 1962;4:69–80.
Sinha R, Li CS. Imaging stress- and cue-induced drug and alcohol craving: association with
relapse and clinical implications. Drug Alcohol Rev 2007;26:25–31.
Smart RG, Storm T, Baker EF, Solursh L. A controlled study of lysergide in the treatment of
alcoholism. 1. The effects on drinking behavior. Q J Stud Alcohol 1966;27:469–82.
Smith CM. A new adjunct to the treatment of alcoholism: the hallucinogenic drugs. Q J
Stud Alcohol 1958;19:406–17.
Smith CM. Some reﬂections on the possible therapeutic effects of the hallucinogens; with
special reference to alcoholism. Q J Stud Alcohol 1959;20:292–301.
Soloff PH, Price JC, Meltzer CC, Fabio A, Frank GK, Kaye WH. 5HT2A receptor binding is in-
creased in borderline personality disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2007;62:580–7.
Stewart O. The Peyote religion: a history. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press; 1987.
Strassman RJ. Adverse reactions to psychedelic drugs. A review of the literature. J Nerv
Ment Dis 1984;172:577–95.
Tagliazucchi E, Carhart-Harris R, Leech R, Nutt D, Chialvo DR. Enhanced repertoire of brain
dynamical states during the psychedelic experience. Hum Brain Mapp 2014;35:
5442–56.
Thomas G, Lucas P, Capler NR, Tupper KW, Martin G. Ayahuasca-assisted therapy for ad-
diction: results from a preliminary observational study in Canada. Curr Drug Abuse
Rev 2013;6:30–42.
Thompson PM, Cruz DA, Olukotun DY, Delgado PL. Serotonin receptor, SERT mRNA and
correlations with symptoms in males with alcohol dependence and suicide. Acta
Psychiatr Scand 2012;126:165–74.
Tomsovic M, Edwards RV. Lysergide treatment of schizophrenic and nonschizophrenic al-
coholics: a controlled evaluation. Q J Stud Alcohol 1970;31:932–49.
Tsuchioka M, Takebayashi M, Hisaoka K, Maeda N, Nakata Y. Serotonin (5-HT) induces
glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) mRNA expression via the
transactivation of ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) in rat C6 glioma cells.
J Neurochem 2008;106:244–57.
Underwood MD, Mann JJ, Huang YY, Arango V. Family history of alcoholism is associated
with lower 5-HT2A receptor binding in the prefrontal cortex. Alcohol Clin Exp Res
2008;32:593–9.
US Department of Health and Human Services. The health consequences of smoking: 50
years of progress: a report of the surgeon general. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention; 2014.
Vaidya VA, Marek GJ, Aghajanian GK, Duman RS. 5-HT2A receptor-mediated regulation of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor mRNA in the hippocampus and the neocortex. J
Neurosci 1997;17:2785–95.
Volkow ND, Li TK. Drugs and alcohol: treating and preventing abuse, addiction and their
medical consequences. Pharmacol Ther 2005;108:3–17.
Vollenweider FX, Kometer M. The neurobiology of psychedelic drugs: implications for the
treatment of mood disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci 2010;11:642–51.
Vollenweider FX, Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen MF, Babler A, Vogel H, Hell D. Psilocybin
induces schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans via a serotonin-2 agonist action.
Neuroreport 1998;9:3897–902.
Wiesbeck GA, Weijers HG, Chick J, Naranjo CA, Boening J. Ritanserin in relapse prevention
in abstinent alcoholics: results from a placebo-controlled double-blind international
multicenter trial. Ritanserin in Alcoholism Work Group. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1999;
23:230–5.
World Health Organization. WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2011: warning
about the dangers of tobacco. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2011.
Zhang C, Marek GJ. AMPA receptor involvement in 5-hydroxytryptamine2A receptor-
mediated pre-frontal cortical excitatory synaptic currents and DOI-induced head
shakes. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2008;32:62–71.
9
M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article as: Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions, Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002
