Vol.:(0123456789)
CNS Drugs (2020) 34:925–946 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-020-00748-y
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review 
and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
Joost J. Breeksema1,2 · Alistair R. Niemeijer3 · Erwin Krediet2,5 · Eric Vermetten2,4,5   · Robert A. Schoevers1
Published online: 17 August 2020 
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Introduction  Interest in the use of psychedelic substances for the treatment of mental disorders is increasing. Processes that 
may affect therapeutic change are not yet fully understood. Qualitative research methods are increasingly used to examine 
patient accounts; however, currently, no systematic review exists that synthesizes these findings in relation to the use of 
psychedelics for the treatment of mental disorders.
Objective  To provide an overview of salient themes in patient experiences of psychedelic treatments for mental disorders, 
presenting both common and diverging elements in patients’ accounts, and elucidating how these affect the treatment process.
Methods  We systematically searched the PubMed, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, and Embase databases for English-language 
qualitative literature without time limitations. Inclusion criteria were qualitative research design; peer-reviewed studies; 
based on verbalized patient utterances; and a level of abstraction or analysis of the results. Thematic synthesis was used to 
analyze and synthesize results across studies. A critical appraisal of study quality and methodological rigor was conducted 
using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP).
Results  Fifteen research articles, comprising 178 patient experiences, were included. Studies exhibited a broad heterogene-
ity in terms of substance, mental disorder, treatment context, and qualitative methodology. Substances included psilocybin, 
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), ibogaine, ayahuasca, ketamine and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). 
Disorders included anxiety, depression, eating disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, and substance use disorders. While 
the included compounds were heterogeneous in pharmacology and treatment contexts, patients reported largely comparable 
experiences across disorders, which included phenomenological analogous effects, perspectives on the intervention, therapeu-
tic processes and treatment outcomes. Comparable therapeutic processes included insights, altered self-perception, increased 
connectedness, transcendental experiences, and an expanded emotional spectrum, which patients reported contributed to 
clinically and personally relevant responses.
Conclusions  This review demonstrates how qualitative research of psychedelic treatments can contribute to distinguishing 
specific features of specific substances, and carry otherwise undiscovered implications for the treatment of specific psychi-
atric disorders.
 *	 Joost J. Breeksema 
	
j.j.breeksema@umcg.nl
1	
University Center of Psychiatry, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Postbus 30.001, 9700 RB Groningen, 
The Netherlands
2	
Department of Psychiatry, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands
3	
University of Humanistic Studies, Utrecht, The Netherlands
4	
Military Mental Health Care, Utrecht, The Netherlands
5	
ARQ National Psychotrauma Center, Diemen, 
The Netherlands
1  Introduction
The recent resurgence of clinical interest in the use of psych-
edelics for the treatment of mental disorders is evidenced by 
a sharp increase in studies and publications. After a decades-
long research hiatus, psychedelics have been investigated 
as potentially effective treatments for several mental dis-
orders, including substance use disorders (SUDs) [1–4]; 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) [5–10]; anxiety, and 
depression secondary to a life-threatening illness [11–14]; 
social anxiety in autistic adults [15]; obsessive–compul-
sive disorder (OCD) [16]; depression [17–22]; and sui-
cidal ideation [23]. Psychedelic drugs include a range of 


926
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
Key Points 
Patients compare psychedelic treatments favorably with 
conventional treatments, emphasizing the importance 
of non-pharmacological factors such as trust, safety, 
interpersonal rapport, attention, the role of music, and 
the length of treatment sessions.
Pharmacologically distinct psychedelics exhibit overlap-
ping therapeutic processes for different mental disorders, 
including insights, altered self-perception, increased 
feelings of connectedness, transcendental experiences, 
and an expanded emotional spectrum.
Patients frequently report on clinical effects beyond their 
own psychiatric diagnosis, which may be indicative of 
the cross-diagnostic action of psychedelic drugs, by 
setting in motion therapeutic processes that address core 
elements of a shared psychopathology across mental 
disorders.
39]. The Amazonian brew ayahuasca is typically consumed 
in traditional shamanic, religious, and hybrid ceremonial set-
tings [40], whereas ibogaine is administered in both unli-
censed ‘medical subcultures’ [41] and in private clinics such 
as in Mexico and New Zealand [42, 43]. On the other hand, 
the atypical psychedelic ketamine is normally administered 
as a standalone pharmacotherapy in a clinical setting [44].
It has been suggested that the influence of these extrap-
harmacological variables contributes significantly to the 
substances’ pharmacological qualities [33, 35], as evidenced 
by the high variability of individual experiences. Studies 
have emphasized the importance of the subjective experi-
ence [29], and several potential psychological mediators for 
therapeutic outcomes have been postulated in treatments 
with psychedelics, e.g. (sustained) changes in openness 
[45–47], prosocial feelings [45, 48], increases in suggestibil-
ity [49], meaning making [50], self-efficacy [51], and con-
nectedness [52, 53]. Furthermore, psychological flexibility 
[54], emotional breakthroughs [55], psychological insights 
[51], the loss of sense of self (‘ego dissolution’) sometimes 
resulting from mystical or peak experiences [29, 56–58], and 
experiences of awe [59] have been mentioned.
A close examination of patients’ experiential accounts 
could increase our understanding by providing more detailed 
insight into these and other underlying (psychological) 
mechanisms. Given the highly personalized nature of psy-
chedelic-induced patient experiences, quantitative measure-
ments might not capture the full spectrum of phenomena 
experienced by patients. Qualitative inquiry is typically 
concerned with understanding the how, what, or why of a 
particular phenomenon and can generate a more holistic 
account of the issue being studied [60, 61]. This is espe-
cially relevant in this emerging field of research. This makes 
qualitative research well-suited to explore the rich subjec-
tivity of respondents’ inner experiences, their attributions 
of meaning, the treatment context, and help inform a more 
detailed understanding of these complex interventions and 
underlying psychological mechanisms. These may in turn 
better tailor future research as well as inform and improve 
therapeutic effectiveness. Qualitative inquiry can also com-
plement quantitative research by generating, rather than vali-
dating, hypotheses, which can be tested using quantitative 
instruments.
While some qualitative research efforts have been 
directed at exploring the role of the subjective psychedelic 
experience in the treatment of mental disorders, to date no 
systematic review exists. This article aims to address this 
lacuna by presenting an overview of the available quali-
tative research. Identifying salient themes across studies, 
this review presents both common and diverging elements 
in patients’ accounts of their experiences, how they relate 
to their disorders, therapeutic processes, and personally 
and clinically significant outcomes. A systematic literature 
pharmacologically diverse substances comprising ‘classic’ 
serotonergic psychedelics (psilocybin, lysergic acid diethyla-
mide [LSD], and the dimethyltryptamine [DMT]-containing 
ayahuasca), entactogens (e.g. the serotonin-releasing drug 
3,4-methyenedioxymethamphetamine [MDMA]), the atypi-
cal psychedelic ibogaine and dissociative anesthetics such as 
the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist ketamine. All 
these substances can induce alterations of conscious states, 
as well as a wide range of psychological, cognitive, emo-
tional, and biological effects that may be relevant for their 
therapeutic action, when administered within a (psycho)
therapeutic context [24–28].
The safety, clinical benefits and therapeutic outcomes of 
these interventions are thought to be fundamentally reliant 
on a supportive environment [29, 30], with ‘set’ and ‘set-
ting’ playing a crucial role [31, 32]. ‘Set’ includes internal, 
psychological variables such as personality, expectations, 
suggestibility, preparation, intentions, and mood and psycho-
pathology, while ‘setting’ is understood to mean the external 
environment in which the experiences take place, including 
the physical, interpersonal, and broader social and cultural 
contexts [33–36]. Therapeutic use of psychedelics takes 
place in different settings. Modern clinical research with 
psilocybin, LSD and MDMA is typically conducted in the 
context of so-called ‘psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy’, 
which is a complex and variable modality that involves the 
administration of a psychedelic drug to facilitate or catalyze 
a therapeutic process [37]. Typically, this takes place in the 
presence of one or two therapists, and often involves the use 
of music to facilitate an introspective experience [33, 38, 


927
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
review was conducted of qualitative studies that address 
what patients report after taking a psychedelic substance in 
the context of treatment of a mental disorder.
2  Methods
We systematically identified and reviewed the selected 
studies using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, which 
offer an extensive checklist and flowchart to improve the 
quality of systematic reviews [62].
2.1  Selection Criteria
For this systematic review we selected papers that described 
patient experiences after taking a psychedelic for the pur-
pose of treating a mental disorder. The eligibility criteria 
for inclusion in the review were qualitative research design; 
peer-reviewed studies in English; based on verbalized 
patient utterances; and a level of abstraction or analysis of 
the results. Eligibility criteria for inclusion were based on a 
modified PICo framework for qualitative reviews [63]. We 
employed a broad definition of psychedelics (see Table 1).
2.2  Search Strategy and Study Selection
We conducted a systematic search between 5 and 12 March 
2019. The PubMed, MEDline, PsycINFO, and EMBASE 
databases were searched extensively and systematically 
without time limitations, using combinations of both index 
terms (Medical Subject Headings [MeSH] in PubMed, 
Emtree in Embase, and Thesaurus in PsycINFO) and free-
text terms in two categories. The first category included a 
broad range of psychedelic substances, including the atypical 
psychedelics ketamine, ibogaine, and MDMA. The second 
category involved the type of data that were gathered (e.g. 
“patient experience*”, “phenomenology”, “patient perspec-
tive*”, “participant experience*”, “subjective experience*”) 
and the qualitative methodology (e.g. “qualitative research”, 
“semi-structured interview*”, “focus group*”, “qualita-
tive methods”, “thematic analysis”, “grounded theory”, 
“interpretative phenomenological analysis”). All databases 
were searched using “OR-relations” within these categories, 
and “AND-relations” between categories. A detailed account 
of the searches can be obtained from the first author upon 
request. The systematic search was complemented by hand 
searching, including reference lists of identified articles as 
well as relevant, non-indexed journals. The selection pro-
cess was conducted according to the eligibility criteria as 
presented in the PRISMA flow diagram in Fig. 1.
2.3  Data Analysis and Synthesis
Qualitative research seeks to develop a contextual under-
standing of behavior in the natural environment it observes. 
This does not mean that generalizability is impossible, but 
rather that theoretical generalization, i.e. transference, must 
be separated from statistical significance [64]. Whereas sys-
tematic review methods are well developed for randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs), no single preferred methodology 
exists to guide analysis and synthesis of qualitative data [65, 
66] or to guide critical appraisal of study methodology and 
validity [67–69]. For this review, we employed thematic syn-
thesis [70], based on thematic analysis [71], as this approach 
is particularly useful for bringing together heterogeneous 
studies [72]. Since we did not want to exclude potentially 
relevant articles a priori, we conducted a post-synthesis 
sensitivity analysis [68] using the Critical Appraisal Skills 
Programme (CASP) checklist, also in order to assess the 
methodological rigor of the studies [73].
Thematic synthesis took place in three stages. First, all 
included articles were read and re-read carefully several 
times by the first author, allowing him to become thoroughly 
familiar with the content of the material. We were primarily 
interested in patient experiences, therefore, as our primary 
data, we took the results sections of all articles, including the 
categories and subthemes identified by the articles’ authors. 
The first author then interpreted the data, and assigned pri-
mary codes. Parallel, he noted down comments, observa-
tions and reflections. Second, these codes were examined 
for similarities and differences, and were rewritten with 
a higher level of (psychological) abstraction into themes. 
Finally, these themes were subsequently reanalyzed and 
Table 1   PICo framework
LSD lysergic acid diethylamide, MDMA 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
Population
Patients with a mental disorder seeking treatment
Phenomenon of Interest
Experiences elicited/induced by the deliberate administration of psyche-
delic substances, including classic psychedelics such as psilocybin, 
LSD, mescaline, and ayahuasca, as well as atypical psychedelics such 
as ibogaine, salvinorin A, MDMA and ketamine, but excluding can-
nabis
Context
Therapeutic setting, context that facilitates therapeutic experiences


928
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
grouped together by all authors, based on conceptual simi-
larities; these clusters comprised major themes and were 
given a descriptive label. We paid specific attention to poten-
tial similarities and differences by substance. All authors 
discussed additional analyses, and, where needed, categories 
were refined.
3  Results
3.1  Study Selection
The initial literature search identified a total of 1660 results 
(PubMed, n =1025; PsycINFO, n =232; and EMBASE, 
n =403, and additional hand searches yielded five extra 
records. After removal of duplicates, the remaining 1472 
Records excluded
(n = 1375)
Screening
Included
Eligibility
Idenﬁcaon
Studies included in 
systemac review
(n = 15)
Full-text arcles excluded, 
with reasons
(n = 82)
Not in English (n=4)
Quantave or survey-
based (n=35)
Non-empirical or 
theorecal (n=12)
Does not report on 
therapeuc eﬀects (n=18)
Case report (n=4)
No clear populaon or 
methodology (n=1)
Based on online published 
self-reports (n=4)
Not peer-reviewed (n=4)
Full-text arcles assessed 
for eligibility
(n = 97)
Records idenﬁed through 
database searching
(n = 1660)
Records screened
(n = 1472)
Records aer duplicates removed
(n = 1472)
Addional records idenﬁed 
through other sources
(n = 5)
Fig. 1   Systematic search flowchart


929
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
publications were screened. Screening titles and reading 
abstracts resulted in the exclusion of 1375 titles. Ninety-
seven full-text articles were obtained and read. Relevant 
information was extracted and assigned an additional code of 
yes/no/maybe, according to the inclusion criteria. Seventy-
nine additional articles were excluded for not meeting the 
criteria (see Fig. 1 for a further breakdown of the reasons). 
Three articles were excluded at a late stage: one study on 
the clinical use of MDMA [74] was ultimately excluded as 
it did not target a specific mental disorder and had unclear 
research methodology and study aims. Two recent psilocy-
bin studies [75, 76] were also excluded as they presented a 
series of case studies, without additional analysis. Finally, 
15 studies, with a total of 178 patients, were included in the 
systematic review.
3.2  Study Characteristics
All articles were published between 2014 and 2019. Where 
reported, respondents’ ages ranged from 21 to 67 years, and 
the number of included subjects ranged from 4 [77] to 22 
[78, 79]. Studies were heterogeneous in terms of substances, 
population/mental disorders, contexts, and qualitative 
research methodologies. For an overview of all substances 
and disorders, please see Table 2.
All studies on psilocybin, LSD, ketamine, and MDMA 
took place in the context of clinical research in the US 
[80–84], Switzerland [85] and the UK [53]. Ibogaine treat-
ments took place in treatment centers in Mexico [86] and 
Brazil [78, 79], while ayahuasca was used in ceremonial [87, 
88], religious [89] or treatment contexts [90].
3.3  Critical Appraisal of Study Quality
The quality of the included studies varied. Based on the 
CASP criteria [73], one study could be considered as low 
to medium quality [78] and two as medium quality [86, 89]. 
The majority of the studies were rated as medium/high [79, 
80, 85, 90] to high quality [77, 81–84, 87, 88, 91]. Overall, 
we found the validity, ethical considerations, and value of 
the studies to be of high quality. Critical reflections on the 
researchers’ roles and relationship with participants var-
ied widely, but this was not reflected in the overall quality 
assessment. Across the board, the rigor of the data analysis 
varied most and had the most room for improvement. An 
overview of the quality assessment of all included papers is 
presented in Appendix A. In order to examine the extent to 
which quality variations may have influenced the thematic 
synthesis, we conducted a post hoc sensitivity analysis. 
Assessing the relative contribution of the included studies 
to the thematic synthesis and overall themes, we found that 
lower-quality studies and studies with divergent research 
aims contributed comparatively less to the synthesis. The 
specific study aims and objectives correlated most clearly 
with the thematic synthesis. For instance, studies that aimed 
to address patients’ subjective experience of a substance’s 
psychoactive effects [79, 84, 86, 88] contributed mostly 
to the phenomenology section. The studies that focused 
on patient experiences of the therapeutic process [82, 85, 
88], aimed to increase the understanding of these complex 
treatments [81, 82, 85, 90], or (also) aimed to characterize, 
describe, or determine potential therapeutic mechanisms, 
effects, and processes [53, 82, 83, 85, 87, 90] contributed 
Table 2   Qualitative research categorized by mental disorder and psychedelic substance
LSD lysergic acid diethylamide, MDMA 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
Ayahuasca
Ibogaine
Ketamine
LSD
MDMA
Psilocybin
End-of-life anxiety
Gasser et al. 
(2015) [85]
Swift et al. (2017) [81]
Belser et al. (2017) [82]
Depressive disorder
van Schalk-
wyk et al. 
(2017) [84]
Watts et al. (2017) [53]
Eating disorder
Renelli et al. (2018) 
[88]
Lafrance et al. (2017) 
[87]
Post-traumatic stress 
disorder
Barone et al. 
(2019) [80]
Substance use disorder 
(specific drug used)
Loizaga-Velder and 
Verres (2014) 
(mixed) [90]
Talin and Sanabria 
(2017) (not speci-
fied) [89]
Camlin et al. (2018) 
(opioids) [86]
Schenberg et al. 
(2017) (cocaine, 
others) [78, 79]
Noorani et al. (2018)
(tobacco) [83]
Nielson et al. (2018)
(alcohol) [77]


930
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
most to the perspectives on the intervention, therapeutic pro-
cesses and outcomes. While we found quality differences, 
no articles were excluded based on our quality assessment. 
A complete overview of study aims, qualitative methodol-
ogy and other study characteristics can be found in Table 3.
3.4  Nature of Patient Experiences
We primarily assessed descriptions and narratives of patient 
experiences. Our analysis revealed that all authors discussed 
one or more of the following: (1) phenomenology of the 
experience; (2) perspectives on the intervention; (3) thera-
peutic processes; and (4) outcomes of the intervention. 
Below we elaborate on each of the subthemes falling under 
these main themes, and provide key examples of each of the 
themes and results. In many instances, themes were reported 
for different substances and/or disorders. Where this was not 
the case, this is made explicit in the text. Quotes are included 
to illustrate patient experiences.
3.4.1  Phenomenology of the Psychedelic Experience
Several, but not all, studies explicitly addressed the phenom-
enology of the acute, inner experience induced by different 
psychedelic substances [79, 81, 82, 84, 86]. In this review, 
we report phenomena that were not characterized as thera-
peutic processes alone or that did not constitute separate 
themes in the synthesis, while recognizing that both the-
matic categories are closely intertwined. Phenomenological 
experiences were reported on the level of altered sensory 
perception (including synesthesia and the perception of 
time), visions and visuals, and somatic effects. Respond-
ents frequently alluded to the ineffability of the experience.
A slowed (or completely absent) perception of time and 
unusual bodily sensations were specifically mentioned by 
participants taking ketamine [84], while auditory effects, 
such as zapping or buzzing sounds, were only mentioned for 
ibogaine experiences [79, 86]. Abstract and transient visual 
phenomena (such as seeing animals, complex patterns, land-
scapes) and visions (immersive and personally meaningful) 
were reported by respondents in studies with psilocybin and 
ibogaine [79, 81, 82, 86]. To varying degrees, these visions 
contained autobiographical, relational, imaginary, dream-
like, indigenous, religious, and other elements.
“It sent me back to when I was very first born and felt 
like I was inside the womb … I fought the devil … he 
was telling me to give up and die, but I didn’t want to 
and I somehow beat him. And that I thought was my 
addiction at the time … I was able to float up in the 
atmosphere and I felt my grandma, I just felt her pres-
ence everywhere and I realized that she was all around 
the whole time.” [86] [ibogaine, SUD].
Notably, participants who had taken ibogaine reported 
physically unpleasant sensations, neurological effects and 
perceptual alterations that were not described in other stud-
ies [79, 86], although unusual and strange bodily sensations 
were also reported for ketamine [84]. Experiences of the 
brain being reorganized, accompanied by ‘zapping’ sensa-
tions, were described in studies with ibogaine [79, 86] and 
psilocybin [91].
“There was a little NASA space guy that came flying 
in and he was zapping my brain … it felt like they were 
scrubbing my brain, they were just doing surgery… it 
felt like brain receptors being cleaned.” [86] [ibogaine, 
SUD].
Somatic experiences were often connected to meaningful 
insights for participants with eating disorders, as evidenced 
by the following quote:
“I saw myself as a rotting, decaying skeleton and then 
I saw myself as this beautiful full-bodied, just beauti-
ful woman with this long hair, and I, like, I wanted to 
be that woman. I wanted to be that full, loving woman 
that has so much to offer my family and world. It was, 
and then I felt my ribs and I could feel them, they 
were so hollow and I was just, I was like, I can’t wait 
to get back and just start gaining some weight.” [87] 
[ayahuasca, eating disorder].
Several respondents, especially in studies with psilocy-
bin [77, 81, 82], and also with other substances, remarked 
on the ineffable nature of the experience, their inability to 
adequately put it into words, leading some to mention that 
it was easier to describe the emotional impact of the experi-
ence than the specific content.
“It was a feeling beyond an intellectual feeling—it was 
a feeling to the bottom of my core … that’s one reason 
that it’s hard to talk about … it’s beyond words.” [81] 
[psilocybin, end-of-life anxiety].
3.4.2  Perspectives on the Intervention
How the treatment itself was experienced proved an impor-
tant aspect for many of the respondents. This main category 
encompasses the following subthemes: (a) the context and 
structure of the treatment, and (b) comparisons with con-
ventional treatments.
3.4.2.1  Context and  Structure of  the  Intervention  Inde-
pendent of substance or disorder, many patients reported 
how they experienced the treatment, and the ways interven-
tions were structured. Trust and a good connection or rap-
port with study guides, therapists and ceremonial leaders 


931
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
Table 3   Overview of study aims, substances, population, diagnosis, treatment context, data sources and qualitative methodology
Study
Study aims
Substance, dose, and 
frequency
Population: n, sex, 
age range (years)
Diagnosis/symptoms
Treatment context
Data sources
Qualitative methodol-
ogy
Loizaga-Velder and 
Verres (2014) [90]
To broaden knowl-
edge of ayahuasca-
assisted therapy for 
substance depend-
encies
To describe possible 
psychotherapeutic 
mechanisms
To identify variables 
that may influence 
treatment outcomes
To identify possible 
risks
To explore the possi-
bilities of integrating 
this approach into 
Western countries
Ayahuasca
Dose and frequency 
not reported
n = 14
Sex not reported
Age range 24–52
Substance depend-
ence
Diverse treatment 
settings in South 
America providing 
ayahuasca-assisted 
therapy for addiction
Participation in 
ayahuasca ritual 
without formal treat-
ment
Field observations
Participative observa-
tion
Problem-centered 
interviews
Textual resources 
(e.g. patient files 
and statements)
CA
Gasser et al. (2015) 
[85]
To evaluate the 
long-term effects on 
anxiety
To explore subjective 
experiences and last-
ing psychological 
changes
To explore subjec-
tive experiences 
and elements of the 
therapeutic process
To gain a more holis-
tic understanding 
from a client-cen-
tered perspective
LSD
1 × 200 μg LSD
n = 10 (4 females)
Age range 39–64
Anxiety associated 
with a life-threaten-
ing disease
Phase II, double-
blind, active 
placebo-controlled, 
randomized clinical 
trial, conducted in a 
private psychiatric 
practice in Switzer-
land
Semi-structured inter-
views, conducted 
12 months after the 
last session, in the 
patient’s home or 
over the phone
QCA
Lafrance et al. (2017) 
[87]
To explore possible 
psychological and 
physical effects
To explore the per-
ceived impact of the 
preparatory diet and 
experience of the 
ayahuasca purge
Ayahuasca
1–30 × ceremonies
Dosage not reported
n = 16 (14 females)
Age range 21–50 
(mean 33.5)
ED
Anorexia nervosa (10)
Bulimia nervosa (6)
Ayahuasca cer-
emonies in various 
settings in North, 
Central and South 
America
Semi-structured 
telephone inter-
views: < 1 month 
(n = 6), 1–12 months 
(n = 6) and 
1–3 years (n = 4) 
after last ayahuasca 
session
TA


932
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
Table 3   (continued)
Study
Study aims
Substance, dose, and 
frequency
Population: n, sex, 
age range (years)
Diagnosis/symptoms
Treatment context
Data sources
Qualitative methodol-
ogy
Schenberg et al. 
(2017) [78]
To test the hypothesis 
that ibogaine treat-
ment combined with 
cognitive therapy 
is beneficial for 
patients with SUDs
Ibogaine HCl
12 mg/kg 
(females)/15 mg/kg 
(males)
Frequency not 
reported
n = 22 (7 females)
Age range 22–53 
(mean 33)
SUDs
Psychotherapy in a 
private clinic, ibo-
gaine administration 
in a hospital setting 
in Brazil
Semi-structured face-
to-face interviews, 
time after session 
not reported
Deductive content 
analysis
Schenberg et al. 
(2017) [79]
To explore (acute) 
subjective experi-
ences induced by 
ibogaine
Ibogaine HCl
12 mg/kg 
(females)/15 mg/kg 
(males)
Frequency not 
reported
n = 22 (7 females)
Age range 22–53 
(mean 33)
Drug dependence
Psychotherapy in a 
private clinic, ibo-
gaine administration 
in a hospital setting 
in Brazil
Semi-structured face-
to-face interviews, 
time after session 
not reported
IPA
Belser et al. (2017) 
[82]
To research form and 
content of par-
ticipant experiences 
during psilocybin 
sessions
To describe subjec-
tive experiences of 
the intervention in 
context
To understand embed-
ded meanings of 
participants’ lived 
experiences
Psilocybin
2 × 0.3 mg/kg psilo-
cybin
n = 13 (6 females)
Age range 50 ± 15.77
A projected life 
expectancy of at 
least 1 year, and a 
primary diagnosis 
of acute stress dis-
order, generalized 
anxiety disorder, 
anxiety disorder due 
to cancer, or adjust-
ment disorder with 
anxiety
Phase II, double-
blind, crossover, 
placebo-controlled 
pilot study to assess 
the efficacy and 
safety of psilocybin 
in conjunction with 
psychotherapy on 
psychosocial dis-
tress with cancer
Semi-structured inter-
views conducted 
1 week (n = 5) or 
12 months (n = 7) 
after the treatment
IPA
Swift et al. 
(2017) [81]
To explore psilocybin 
therapy experiences 
related to cancer and 
death
To capture a more 
complete under-
standing of the 
treatment
Psilocybin
2 × 0.3 mg/kg psilo-
cybin
n = 13 (6 females)
Age range 50 ± 15.77
Projected life 
expectancy of at 
least 1 year, and a 
primary diagnosis 
of acute stress dis-
order, generalized 
anxiety disorder, 
anxiety disorder due 
to cancer, or adjust-
ment disorder with 
anxiety
Phase II, double-
blind, crossover, 
placebo-controlled 
pilot study to assess 
the efficacy and 
safety of psilocybin 
in conjunction with 
psychotherapy on 
psychosocial dis-
tress with cancer
Semi-structured inter-
views conducted 
1 week (n = 5) or 
12 months (n = 7) 
after the treatment
IPA


933
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
Table 3   (continued)
Study
Study aims
Substance, dose, and 
frequency
Population: n, sex, 
age range (years)
Diagnosis/symptoms
Treatment context
Data sources
Qualitative methodol-
ogy
Talin and Sanabria 
(2017) [89]
To examine people’s 
attempts to heal 
substance use they 
see as problematic
To examine the bio-
medical concept of 
addiction in relation 
to ayahuasca healing 
practices
Ayahuasca
Dose and frequency 
not reported
n = 7
Sex and age range not 
reported
Substance depend-
ence (heroin, 
cocaine, crack, 
methadone, alcohol, 
tobacco and antide-
pressants)
Ayahuasca cer-
emonies—in Santo 
Daime churches in 
Italy. Urban aya-
huasca ceremonies 
in Brazil
Participant observa-
tions
Semi-structured, in-
depth interviews
Ethnographic analysis
Watts et al. (2017) 
[53]
To determine and 
communicate under-
lying psychological 
mechanisms in this 
treatment modality
Psilocybin
2 × 10 and 25 mg
n = 19 (6 females)
Age range 30–64
Treatment-resistant 
depression
Open-label feasibility 
trial of psilocybin 
with psycho-
logical support for 
treatment-resistant 
depression
Semi-structured inter-
views conducted 
at 6 months post 
psilocybin dose
TA
Camlin et al. (2018) 
[86]
To understand the 
subjective ibogaine 
experience
To understand how 
ibogaine impacts 
individuals attempt-
ing to stop problem-
atic opioid use
Ibogaine
Dose and frequency 
not reported
n = 10 (3 females)
Age range 21–48 
(28.8 years)
Opioid use disorder
An ibogaine treatment 
center in a medical 
facility in Mexico
Semi-structured inter-
views conducted 
3 days (n = 9) and 
3 months post treat-
ment (n = 1)
Constant comparative 
method
Nielson et al. (2018) 
[77]
To explore how 
patients talk about 
change-related 
phenomena during 
debriefing sessions
Psilocybin
2 × 0.3 and 0.4 mg/kg
n = 10
Sex not reported
Age range 25–56
Alcohol use disorder
Open-label pilot 
study of psilocybin-
assisted treatment of 
alcohol use disorder
Transcripts from 17 
debriefing sessions 
conducted 1 day 
post psilocybin 
session
QCA
Noorani et al. (2018) 
[83]
To characterize per-
ceived mechanisms 
of change
To identify themes 
emerging from par-
ticipant accounts
To inquire about 
participants’ experi-
ences of the study 
treatment
To understand the 
ways the treatment 
may have helped 
them quit smoking
Psilocybin
2 × 20 and 
30 mg/70 kg
n = 12 (5 females)
Age range 31–67 
(mean 54)
Nicotine dependence
Open-label pilot 
study of psilocybin-
assisted treatment 
for smoking ces-
sation, Baltimore 
(USA)
Face-to-face inter-
views conducted, on 
average, 30 months 
after the first psilo-
cybin session
TA


934
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
Table 3   (continued)
Study
Study aims
Substance, dose, and 
frequency
Population: n, sex, 
age range (years)
Diagnosis/symptoms
Treatment context
Data sources
Qualitative methodol-
ogy
Renelli et al. (2018) 
[88]
To report on the 
perspectives of 
participants who 
experienced both 
ceremonial aya-
huasca drinking and 
conventional ED 
treatments
Ayahuasca
Dosage not reported
1–30 × ceremonies
n = 13 (12 females)
Age range 21–49 
(mean 30)
ED:
Anorexia nervosa (8)
Bulimia nervosa (5)
Various (1–30) aya-
huasca ceremonies, 
rooted in Amazo-
nian traditions
Semi-structured inter-
views via telephone, 
conducted 1 month 
or less (n = 5), 
1–12 months (n = 5) 
or 12–36 months 
(n = 3) after the 
most recent cer-
emony
TA
van Schalkwyk et al. 
(2018) [84]
To explore the dis-
sociative experience 
from first-person 
patient narratives
Ketamine
Frequency not 
reported
0.5 mg/kg over 
40 min intrave-
nously
n = 10 (7 females)
Mean age 52.6
Unipolar major 
depressive disorder 
(9)
Bipolar disorder (1)
Randomized 
controlled trials 
of ketamine vs. 
placebo, open-label 
trial of ketamine, or 
ketamine as clinical 
treatment (n not 
reported)
Semi-structured 
interviews
Mixed methods
Inductive TA
Barone et al. (2019) 
[80]
To examine MDMA-
assisted psychother-
apy in a long-term 
follow-up context
To complement, 
clarify, and expand 
upon quantitative 
findings
MDMA
3 × 100–125 mg
n = 19 (6 females)
Age range 24–56
Treatment-resistant 
PTSD
Phase II RCT investi-
gating the safety and 
efficacy of MDMA-
assisted psycho-
therapy for military 
veterans and first 
responders with 
treatment-resistant 
PTSD
Semi-structured inter-
views, conducted 
12 months after the 
end of the trial
TA and IPA
CA content analysis, ED eating disorders, HCl hydrochloride, IPA interpretative phenomenological analysis, LSD lysergic acid diethylamide, MDMA 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, 
PTSD post-traumatic stress disorder, QCA qualitative content analysis, RCT​ randomized controlled trial, SUDs substance use disorders, TA thematic analysis


935
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
were explicitly mentioned as important therapeutic aspects 
[53, 80, 83, 87, 89].
“It’s not just the psilocybin sessions [but] it’s that 
human connection, and the support that comes with 
that human connection, that ultimately leads to suc-
cess at the end of the day.” [83] [psilocybin, smoking 
cessation].
Many respondents also noted the importance of the pre-
paratory sessions [53, 80, 83, 90]; for example, in prepar-
ing them for the potential of having challenging experiences 
[53]. The added value of integration sessions was also men-
tioned frequently [53, 80, 82, 83, 87].
“I mean besides the ayahuasca itself, besides the 
medicinal quality of you know, chemically what aya-
huasca can do, I would say that (the most important 
therapeutic elements were) the trust, therapeutic trust 
in the medicine men and as well, the follow-up. The 
psychotherapy follow-up was crucial. And before and 
after (ceremony) I would say. I don’t know if I would 
ever recommend an ayahuasca ceremony without that 
therapeutic, the first one at least, without that thera-
peutic follow-up.” [87] [ayahuasca, eating disorder].
Music was used in all studies with psilocybin, MDMA, 
and LSD, as well as in ayahuasca ceremonies. One ibogaine 
study was conducted in silence [78, 79]; the third ibogaine 
study [86] and the ketamine study [84] did not report on 
this aspect. Only patients in various psilocybin studies (for 
end-of-life anxiety, depression, and smoking cessation) [53, 
82, 83] reflected on the role and function of music, stating 
that it served as a conduit, enabling them to experience and 
surrender to painful emotions or memories.
“Music was really how everything was conveyed to 
me, it all came through the music … like everything 
that I experienced did not really happen in the English 
language, it kind of happened through the music, like 
the music was the conduit for this experience to hap-
pen.” [82] [psilocybin, end-of-life anxiety].
In contrast with many other classes of psychoactive 
substances (ketamine being a possible exception [92, 93]), 
psychedelics do not lead to addiction or dependence [25, 
94], and some respondents with SUDs remarked on these 
notable differences [79, 83]. In two of the studies that pro-
vided a single psilocybin session, several patients expressed 
the wish for additional sessions [82], and one study reported 
that several patients actively sought out extramedical psilo-
cybin sessions for this reason [53].
3.4.2.2  Comparisons with Other Treatments  Irrespective of 
disorder or substance, respondents reflected on different ele-
ments of the intervention, comparing these with previously 
experienced conventional treatments. Many also reflected 
on previous strategies in coping with their disorder, and 
how these were addressed, often less effectively, in previous 
treatments [53, 78, 81]. Below, we provide some examples 
of particular personalized experiences of psychedelic treat-
ments. These are often juxtaposed generally with standard 
treatments, although respondents did not always specify 
what these treatments entailed.
“Standard approaches—I guess to summarize—are 
very top-down … like suppressing symptoms so that 
you can become functional, whereas the work with 
the medicine [ayahuasca] … is more of a bottom up 
approach that is very much really rewiring things, 
it’s getting to the root cause and bringing in what 
was missing and resolving it on a deep, deep level 
that doesn’t I don’t think really get fully explored 
or touched upon in standard approaches.” [88] [aya-
huasca, eating disorder].
Respondents from across the spectrum of disorders and 
substances compared their psychedelic treatments favorably 
to previously undergone conventional treatments, calling it, 
for example, more effective [88], less normative [89], or 
more rapid [78], by focusing on inner processes as opposed 
to talk therapy [85] and by providing healing beyond what 
they found in conventional treatments [80]. Patients also 
favored the length of the sessions and attention they received 
[53].
“In usual psychotherapy it is mainly about talking, 
about words. In LSD-assisted psychotherapy it is 
mainly about inner processes, inner change, inner 
experience, it gets enriched by it.” [85] [LSD, end-of-
life anxiety].
Many respondents reflected upon the intervention’s effec-
tiveness for the specific disorder they were struggling with 
[78, 80, 88, 90]. In the below quote, a patient with PTSD 
mentions several crucial elements that together enabled him 
to address his (war-related) trauma.
“I think that the MDMA gave me the ability to feel as 
though I was capable and safe of tackling the issues. 
Whereas before I feared those thoughts and I tried to 
avoid them at all times, and avoid things that reminded 
me of those thoughts, I think it allowed me to feel safe 
in my space. Of being able to fight it. I felt like I had 
the ability and tools, whereas before I was unarmed, 
unarmored, and had no support. And this type of envi-
ronment, with [the therapists], the catalyst drug, and 
everything else, it felt as though I had backup. Now it 
was safe and I had my tools and weapons to be able 
to tackle the obstacles that I never had before.” [80] 
[MDMA, PTSD].


936
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
Multiple patients who underwent ayahuasca ceremonies 
to treat eating disorders provided suggestions for integrat-
ing these with conventional eating disorder treatments [88]. 
Respondents in one study, when prompted, actually stated 
becoming more open towards future conventional therapies, 
despite having undergone multiple therapies without suc-
cess [80].
3.4.3  Therapeutic Processes
Potential psychological or therapeutic processes or mecha-
nisms of action constituted a major theme that, in one way 
or another, recurred in all studies included in this review. 
These cover several categories, which overlap to a certain 
degree. Often, there was no clear-cut distinction between 
the different therapeutic mechanisms, and elements of one 
therapeutic mechanism blended into others. Acknowledging 
their interrelatedness, in this review we report on the follow-
ing categories: (1) insights; (2) altered self-perception; (3) 
feelings of connectedness; (4) transcendental experiences; 
and (5) expanded emotional spectrum. These are briefly dis-
cussed below.
3.4.3.1  Insights  One of the most frequently mentioned 
themes was achieving insights, most crucially into one’s self, 
alternatively called improved self-awareness or self-under-
standing. This was also frequently mentioned as an outcome 
of the intervention. For various disorders and substances, 
patients reported improved insights in their disorder, its root 
causes, and related behaviors [80, 83, 87, 88, 90].
“I remember having a ceremony where I really saw 
that at the time binging and purging and restricting 
were actually adaptive coping mechanisms; at the time, 
they were the only coping mechanisms that I actually 
knew to use to deal with the difficulty that I was expe-
riencing, that I had no words for and that no one was 
asking about.” [87] [ayahuasca, eating disorder].
These insights resulted in an improved understanding 
of the underlying disorders, the root psychological causes 
[87], an improved understanding of the underlying causes 
of addiction [90], and, more specifically for patients with 
eating disorders, somatic insights [87]. Respondents also 
gained crucial insights into their behavior towards others 
with regard to relationships with friends, family or part-
ners [78, 82]. Specific examples of these mechanisms were 
visions of an autobiographical nature [79], a new under-
standing of death and dying [81], and changes in perspec-
tive, also referred to as ‘de-schematizing’ [85]. In one study, 
patients describe how insights continued to evolve across 
and between psilocybin sessions [83].
3.4.3.2  Altered Self‑Perception  Alterations in how the 
self was experienced during the sessions played an impor-
tant role in many studies in this review. The emphasis on 
changed perceptions of, and perspectives on, one’s self 
was mentioned variably as increased self-efficacy [78], 
decreased self-criticism [86], facilitated by a lowering of 
psychological defense mechanisms [53], and increased self-
awareness [78, 80, 87]. Closely associated were experiences 
of greater self-love, self-care, self-confidence, self-accept-
ance, self-awareness, self-worth, self-control, self-esteem, 
self-compassion, and self-forgiveness.
“I learned a lot. I learned a lot about myself. I’d gotten 
to the point of questioning myself, my own morals, 
and for someone who hasn’t done this stuff, they’re not 
going to understand. You can see yourself like you can 
read a book and see everything that you stand for and 
kind of analyze your own self, your own thought, your 
own reasoning.” [80] [MDMA, PTSD].
Related to this were experiences of a dissolving or loos-
ening sense of self, which often gave way to a wider per-
spective, which was linked to transcendental experiences 
(see below).
“Ayahuasca helped me deeply connect with myself so 
that self-love has been the prevalent priority over self-
criticism that […] self-love became more important 
and more prevalent. And that to me is the antidote for 
an eating disorder.” [87] ⁠ [ayahuasca, eating disorder].
3.4.3.3  Connectedness  Increased connection, or connect-
edness, was a central theme in one study on psilocybin treat-
ment for depression [53]. Across other studies with psilo-
cybin, as well as with ibogaine and ayahuasca, respondents 
also describe (re)connection on different levels; internally 
(with their emotions, senses, parts of their self and their 
identity), as well as externally (with others, i.e. partners, 
family members, friends [53, 78, 83, 88], and also with 
nature and the world at large [53, 81, 82].
“(The psilocybin) just opens you up and it connects 
you … it’s not just people, it’s animals, it’s trees—
everything is interwoven, and that’s a big relief … I 
think it does help you accept death because you don’t 
feel alone, you don’t feel like you’re going to, I don’t 
know, go off into nothingness. That’s the number one 
thing—you’re just not alone.” [81] [psilocybin, end-
of-life anxiety].
Experiences of interconnectedness, a felt sense of the 
unity of all things, were described explicitly by patients in 
various psilocybin studies [53, 81–83].
“(During the dose) I was everybody, unity, one life 
with 6 billion faces, I was the one asking for love and 


937
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
giving love, I was swimming in the sea, and the sea 
was me.” [53] ⁠ [psilocybin, depression].
3.4.3.4  Transcendental Experiences  Mystical, 
religious 
or spiritual aspects of healing were widely reported in 
patients’ healing experiences in treatment with ayahuasca 
[88, 90], ibogaine [79, 86], and psilocybin [53, 81–83], as 
well as for different mental disorders. These were related to 
transpersonal experiences, feelings of awe and transcend-
ence, a dissolving of the self, a connection to greater forces, 
an interconnectedness with all life, and the unity of all and 
everything.
“It was like being inside of nature, and I could’ve just 
stayed there forever—it was wonderful. All kinds of 
other things were coming, too, like feelings of being 
connected to everything, I mean, everything in nature. 
Everything—even like pebbles, drops of water in 
the sea … it was like magic. It was wonderful, and it 
wasn’t like talking about it, which makes it an idea, it 
was, like, experiential. It was like being inside a drop 
of water, being inside of … a butterfly’s wing. And 
being inside of a cheetah’s eyes.” [82] ⁠ [psilocybin, 
end-of-life anxiety].
3.4.3.5  Expanded Emotional Spectrum  Across substances 
and disorders, respondents report on the wide emotional 
scope of the experience, the increased access to a range of 
emotions, and the importance of the emotional content of 
their experiences. Emotions ranging from bliss, joy, peace, 
and love on one end of the spectrum, to anger, anxiety, ter-
ror, dysphoria, and paranoia on the other end, were reported 
by respondents in the majority of the articles.
“Emotionally it was a roller coaster ride … The first 
time it was very brutal, painful, at least emotionally 
very painful. I could not even say in which direction—
it just hurt, like heartache, like being disappointed, 
like everything you once had experienced as a nega-
tive feeling. … It was pure pain. Pain of memories, 
well, or memory of pain. … it was quite hard. During 
the second time it was sublime. Really. Love, expan-
sion, holding, I knew that this sometimes happens, that 
participants talk about spiritual experiences. I thought 
they just meant this dissolution of oneself – everything 
is okay, everything is great. That was a very important 
experience for me. Very, very important.” [85] [LSD, 
end-of-life anxiety].
Sometimes a change in mood from their usual emotional 
state was considered therapeutic in itself.
“That place was um, serene and peaceful, and um, just 
such a burden was lifted from me. And it was refresh-
ing to feel something that was such a change from what 
I normally feel.” [84] [ketamine, depression].
In addition to accessing previously inaccessible emotions, 
some respondents also describe an improved ability to pro-
cess unresolved emotions [87, 88]. Participants regularly 
mentioned that experiential sessions could be challenging 
or painful. These emotionally difficult experiences were 
often considered therapeutically useful, especially when 
participants managed to transform negative into positive 
emotions, which often had a lasting impact [53, 78, 81, 82, 
85, 88]. Closely related was the therapeutic importance of 
emotional catharsis, or the release of often painful emotions 
or memories [53, 77, 79, 82, 85]. This tied in closely with 
participants’ ability to accept, and surrender to, the difficult 
emotions they experienced [53, 81, 82, 85, 88].
“Excursions into grief, loneliness and rage, abandon-
ment. Once I went into the anger it went ‘pouf’ and 
evaporated. I got the lesson that you need to go into 
the scary basement, once you get into it, there is no 
scary basement to go into (anymore).” [53] [psilocy-
bin, depression].
In addition to accepting challenging emotional states, 
accepting one’s situation (or more specifically, one’s body 
and illness), particularly in the face of one’s impending 
demise, appeared to play an important role for patients with 
a terminal diagnosis [81, 82, 85].
“I kind of accepted my body for what it is, and I think 
up until that point I resisted that … I saw this body for 
what it’s worth. I picked it, it’s mine. It’s more matter-
of-fact—this is what it is. I think that acceptance has 
been liberating.” [81] [psilocybin, end-of-life anxiety].
3.4.4  Outcomes of the Intervention
It sometimes proved difficult to distinguish outcomes of the 
treatment from processes participants underwent and the 
mechanisms described above. In many cases these over-
lapped: aspects that were experienced during the experien-
tial sessions proved to have a lasting impact. Subthemes in 
this category include (1) symptom relief; (2) perspectives 
of self; (3) sense of connectedness; (4) mood and emotional 
changes; and (5) quality of life.
3.4.4.1  Symptom Relief  In many studies, participants expe-
rienced significant relief from the disorder they were treated 
for, including reductions in eating disorder-related thoughts 
and symptoms, PTSD symptoms, anxiety, depression, and 
substance use. Reductions in withdrawal and reduced (in 
some cases completely vanished) craving were mentioned 
by participants in all studies on SUDs [77, 78, 83, 86, 89, 
90]. Remarkably, decreased drug, alcohol, and medication 


938
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
use were also reported in studies with MDMA, ayahuasca 
and psilocybin that did not deal directly with substance use 
[53, 80, 87].
“When I first started [the study] I was taking 10 dif-
ferent things. And now no blood pressure medicine, 
no anxiety pills, no pain pills.” [80] [MDMA, PTSD].
More broadly, outcomes were often seen beyond the 
realm of the initial diagnosis, and, in fact, participants often 
considered these other results to be more significant.
“This is about a smoking study, I keep forgetting 
that. Because there’s so much more that happened… 
(Smoking) just seems so petty compared to some of 
the stuff that was happening.” [83] [psilocybin, smok-
ing cessation].
3.4.4.2  Perspectives of  Self  Therapeutic outcomes were 
often discussed in the realm of the self. Previously men-
tioned shifts in self-perception as therapeutic process often 
remained with patients, who described being better able to 
understand, reflect on, or be aware of themselves [53, 80, 
83, 87], experienced greater self-confidence and self-esteem 
[87], as well as self-acceptance [86], and found themselves 
better able to feel love and compassion for themselves [80, 
87, 88], leading to better self-care [88].
“[Ibogaine] gave me more self-love … I’m not so hard 
on myself.” [86] [ibogaine, SUD].
3.4.4.3  Sense of Connectedness  Enhanced (inter)connect-
edness was reported across substances, both during ses-
sions and afterwards, with respondents alluding to positive 
changes in friendships and improved relationships with fam-
ily members [53, 78, 80]. One article describes increased 
altruism and prosocial activities in general [83].
“[I feel] love, compassion, and it’s not just for family, 
it’s for everyone…[my parents and I] have a much bet-
ter relationship now, no doubt… the study helped me 
really get there.” [80] [MDMA, PTSD].
“I think right after the trips … certain changes hap-
pened … Same things were not equally important 
anymore. A shift in values. … To take time to listen 
to music, to listen to music consciously. Maybe that 
material values were not that important anymore. That 
other values have priority. Health and family, such 
things… When you have a job and the job has prior-
ity and the family comes last. You don’t even notice it 
anymore. To realize there, stop, what is actually impor-
tant? That the family is fine, that the kids are doing 
well …” [85] [LSD, end-of-life anxiety].
3.4.4.4  Emotions  Participants also reported improved 
mood, greater optimism, an increased emotional repertoire, 
and positive emotional changes [53, 78, 82, 84]. In some 
cases, this included increased confidence in dealing with 
future adverse situations, such as a relapse in symptoms or 
the recurrence of their illness [53, 81].
“Though my problems obviously have not stopped to 
happen and appear, I changed in the face of them. So, 
I get to the end of my day very grateful, very happy.” 
[78] [ibogaine, SUD].
3.4.4.5  Quality of  Life  Across the board, respondents in 
these studies describe positive and often lasting changes in 
quality of life and well-being [78, 82, 85], experiencing an 
increased sense of peace and mental space in daily life [53, 
81, 84]. Respondents also mentioned an increased sense of 
purpose or meaning in life [81]. Increased appreciation of 
beauty in art, music, and nature was reported by several par-
ticipants [53, 83].
“A veil dropped from my eyes, things were suddenly 
clear, glowing, bright. I looked at plants and felt their 
beauty. I can still look at my orchids and experience 
that: that is the one thing that has really lasted.” [53] 
[psilocybin, depression].
In one study, participants report being able to maintain 
this sense of well-being even after relapsing or after symp-
toms return [53]. These positive changes in quality of life 
were reflected in the positive changes participants made, 
such as re-engaging with previously enjoyed activities such 
as practicing sports, changing nutritional habits, reading 
poetry and other hobbies. Changes in quality of life seemed 
associated with revised priorities in life or more clarity 
around values, as exemplified by one participant.
“I had lost desire to do anything, I lacked will to go to 
the gym, to the park, the cinema, I only wanted to stay 
home. After ibogaine the first thing I wanted to do was 
going to the park, to the movies” [78] [ibogaine, SUD].
4  Discussion
This paper is the first to systematically offer an overview 
and thematic synthesis of the qualitative empirical litera-
ture that describes patient experiences of treatments using a 
psychedelic substance for the treatment of a mental disorder. 
All included qualitative studies were published in the last 
5 years, which is indicative of both the increasing interest 
in therapeutic applications of psychedelics and a growing 
appreciation of qualitative methods in clinical research; half 
of the studies complemented quantitative measurements in 
clinical trials. We used a broad definition of psychedelics 


939
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
that included a range of pharmacologically diverse sub-
stances: the ‘classical’ serotonergic psychedelics psilocy-
bin, LSD, and ayahuasca; MDMA; ibogaine; and ketamine, 
which were used to treat several distinct mental disorders. 
This was driven by the presumed shared phenomenology 
of psychedelics [26], combined with the strong phenotypic 
overlap or high comorbidity between psychiatric diagnostic 
categories [95], the genetic overlap between mental disor-
ders [96], as well as the absence of reliable biomarkers [97] 
or natural boundaries [98, 99] to distinguish disorders, and 
also the fact that diagnostic categories can change over time 
[99–101]. Furthermore, there is evidence to support the idea 
that the subjective experience induced by these compounds 
is relevant for their therapeutic effect. To some degree, this 
also holds true for ketamine, which is nevertheless predomi-
nantly administered as a standalone pharmacotherapy [2, 
27, 102–104]. In some instances, a single substance (e.g. 
psilocybin) was used for the treatment of varying mental 
disorders: depression, nicotine dependence, alcohol use dis-
order and end-of-life distress. Similarly, different substances 
(psilocybin, LSD, ayahuasca and ketamine) were studied for 
the treatment of the same disorder (e.g. depression).
Despite the oft-reported ineffability (the inability to 
adequately verbalize the phenomenological content of their 
experiences), respondents in several studies did offer rather 
detailed descriptions of their experiences, as well as reflec-
tions on the intervention. Not all studies described phenom-
enological aspects of the acute experience; this is most likely 
related to the specific methodology used or the researchers’ 
areas of interest.
For a critical appraisal of the qualitative assessment of 
the participants’ experience, it is important to understand 
when, by whom, and how data collection and analysis were 
performed. Given the timing of interviews, which varied 
considerably (from 1 week to 1 year post-session; for an 
overview see Table 3), also within studies, respondents 
may not always have had enough time or distance to gain a 
broader perspective on their experiences, or to experience 
longer-term changes in the first place. As some respondents 
alluded to, insights were not always gained during the inter-
ventions themselves, but rather between sessions, or follow-
ing (integrative) sessions [83].
Interestingly, in some studies, treatment-resistant patients 
in placebo groups reported enduring, clinically significant 
improvements (see, for example [8]). This may illustrate 
the importance attributed to extrapharmacological factors 
that were mentioned by respondents: trust, interpersonal 
rapport, attention, the length of treatment sessions, and a 
safe treatment setting. However, since several studies were 
uncontrolled or open-label, contextual factors could not be 
discriminated from drug effects. Music was also frequently 
mentioned as an important element. This is in line with the 
role of music in both traditional ceremonial psychedelic use 
and present-day clinical psychedelic research [105], suggest-
ing that therapeutic benefits may be promoted not only by 
the drug but by its interaction with music [106]. Music is 
typically used to elicit personally meaningful experiences by 
intensifying emotions and mental imagery; guiding or sup-
porting emerging experiences; and by providing non-verbal 
structure, grounding, and continuity [33, 105, 106].
Therapeutic alliance is considered a strong predictor of 
treatment success in conventional psychotherapy [107]. The 
value respondents attributed to surrendering to and over-
coming intense, emotionally challenging experiences sug-
gests that therapeutic alliance may be crucial in establishing 
patient safety. Participants also stressed the importance of 
preparatory and integration sessions in this respect.
This review revealed several therapeutic mechanisms, all 
reported for multiple substances and disorders. Mechanisms 
include gaining insights, altered self-perception, increased 
feelings of connectedness, transcendental experiences, and 
expanded emotional spectrum. These mechanisms often 
overlapped; elements of one therapeutic mechanism also 
featured in descriptions of others. For example, insights into 
relationships with family or friends related to experiences 
of connectedness, while experiences of interconnectedness 
can also be labeled as mystical. Likewise, an emotional 
breakthrough can follow insight into the origins of one’s 
depression and may be prompted by having surrendered to a 
particularly challenging experience. It is plausible that mul-
tiple mechanisms, or elements thereof, may act together in 
producing therapeutically relevant outcomes.
Descriptions of therapeutic processes were closely inter-
twined with the phenomenology of the subjective experi-
ence, and were often difficult to distinguish from treatment 
outcomes. This can be explained by the presumed thera-
peutic effect of the subjective experience itself, making it 
difficult to disentangle the two. It is also partially inherent 
to the interpretative process of analyzing and synthesizing 
qualitative data. Patient reports can be ambivalent and it is 
not always clear whether they refer to acute experiences or 
longer-term outcomes. Patients reported a range of insights, 
changed perspectives and increased understanding, into the 
self and (root causes of) their disorder. Insights and altered 
self-perception were related to outcomes such as increased 
self-love, self-worth, and self-compassion. Again, these 
were described irrespective of a specific disorder or sub-
stance. Some participants reported experiences of ego dis-
solution, often linked to feelings of connection to larger exis-
tential powers. These spiritual or mystical aspects of healing 
were also mentioned across substance and disorder. Both 
early [108–110] and present-day psychedelic studies [13, 
14, 51, 111, 112] have found significant relations between 
mystical experiences and therapeutic outcomes. Experiences 
of interconnectedness emerged as a theme in all psilocybin 
studies; ‘connectedness’ constituted a major theme in one 


940
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
study [53], prompting new hypotheses and the development 
of new scales [52]. Psychedelics may intensify emotions 
and have been used for this purpose since early psychother-
apy research in the 1950s [113]. Patients also considered 
improved access to a greater range of emotions and emo-
tional content important, particularly being able to process 
and release previously unresolved or inaccessible emotions. 
The fact that catharsis or emotional breakthrough may act 
as a mediating determinant in long-term positive changes 
in well-being is partially validated by recent online surveys 
[55]. Furthermore, patients explicitly attributed value to 
overcoming difficult experiences. These are thought to be 
a mediating factor in both negative and positive long-term 
effects of treatment with psychedelics [114–116]. Evidence 
from survey studies indicated that the peak intensity of chal-
lenging experiences was associated with positive long-term 
outcomes, provided resolution was achieved, as longer dura-
tion was predictive of negative outcomes [116].
Respondents reported both clinically and personally 
meaningful outcomes. An interesting finding was that many 
patients reported benefits beyond symptom reduction. In 
fact, they did not always consider symptom reduction to be 
the primary benefit. In all studies on SUDs, respondents 
reported decreases in craving and withdrawal symptoms 
[77–79, 83, 86, 89, 90]. Interestingly, these reductions were 
also reported by patients with depression, eating disorders, 
and PTSD. While there has been substantial anecdotal, albeit 
not clinical, evidence to suggest that ibogaine in particular is 
capable of attenuating (opioid) withdrawal [43, 117], reduc-
tion and elimination of craving and withdrawal symptoms 
were also reported in studies with ayahuasca [90], psilocybin 
[83] and MDMA [80]. Since many mental disorders have 
high comorbidity with SUDs [118–121], this may explain 
why the therapeutic action of psychedelics may need not be 
limited to a specific disorder or (set of) symptoms.
This review had several limitations. First, studies 
included in this review varied in terms of design, qualita-
tive research methodology, analysis methods, timing of 
the interviews, and overall quality. These factors may have 
influenced results and reduced comparability. Second, we 
considered mental disorders non-specifically. Compounded 
by the diversity of substances and heterogeneity of treat-
ment contexts, it could be argued that this review compared 
orchard-grown apples with indoor-cultivated oranges. Given 
the overlap in phenomenology of these diverse substances, 
the various mental disorders, and combined with the nov-
elty of this field, and the relative paucity of the available 
evidence, this review was meant to serve an exploratory 
purpose and was not intended to yield comparative results 
(as, indeed, this would require more studies per substance 
and per disorder, as well as a multidimensional matrix). As 
a result, substance-specific characteristics for the treatment 
of specific disorders could not be teased out. It has been sug-
gested that MDMA, for example, possesses characteristics 
that make it uniquely useful for the treatment of PTSD [122]; 
the same has been argued for ibogaine in the treatment of 
SUD [42]. The high heterogeneity of the articles included 
in this review do not provide sufficient evidence to establish 
these relations. While this review does not suggest that all 
substances have the same effect, its results do indicate that 
psychedelics—perhaps with the exception of ketamine (as 
there were insufficient qualitative data)–may induce states 
of consciousness that are considered valuable by patients, 
suggesting a broad applicability of different psychedelics 
for mental disorders. More research is needed to substanti-
ate this claim, or to establish whether some substances are 
indeed more qualified for the treatment of specific disorders. 
Third, it is possible that respondents’ favorable reports of 
their psychedelic treatments, when contrasted with previ-
ous (unsuccessful) conventional treatments, may be attrib-
uted to selection or expectation bias. Indeed, a substantial 
proportion of participants reported prior experience with 
psychedelics; this ranged from 10% with LSD [12] to 23% 
with ecstasy (MDMA) [7], and 25% [20], 55% [13] and 67% 
[4] reported prior experience with psilocybin. None of the 
studies on ibogaine and ketamine reported on this; all stud-
ies on ayahuasca, where reported, included participants who 
had undergone between one and 30 ceremonies. Addition-
ally, in various studies, patients were self-selected, meaning 
they may not be representative for the larger population in 
seeking out these novel treatment modalities. Lastly, it is 
possible that research in this field, as in any new (or reap-
pearing) research topic, overvalues positive aspects of these 
treatments [123]. Patient selection in pioneer studies is often 
(unintentionally) biased towards positive outcomes, and 
study samples are still small and non-generalizable. More 
studies in larger and more heterogeneous patient samples 
would be needed to appraise the real impact and ecological 
validity of these treatments.
The advent of psychedelic treatments has recently been 
labeled a new paradigm for psychiatry [124]. Patients fre-
quently report on clinical effects beyond their psychiatric 
diagnosis, and pharmacologically distinct substances appear 
to exert comparable therapeutic processes for the same men-
tal disorders. Psychedelic treatments may well contribute to 
a new sort of non-specific ‘precision medicines’ [125] or 
‘targeted psychotherapies’ of mental disorders, by setting 
in motion subjective therapeutic processes that address root 
causes or core elements of a single psychopathology dimen-
sion (also called p-factor [126]) that manifest differently as 
different mental disorders. Since it is not well understood 
how psychotherapies contribute to change [127], it remains 
important to study these complexities more closely.


941
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
5  Conclusions
Treatments for mental disorders involving psychedelics are 
receiving renewed attention and scrutiny. The therapeu-
tic mediators and mechanisms through which these com-
pounds contribute to treatment outcomes remain insuffi-
ciently understood. Our review revealed several connected 
therapeutic processes—seen across substances and for dif-
ferent disorders—that contributed to clinically significant 
and personally meaningful outcomes. Exploring patient 
experiences can increase our understanding of underlying 
therapeutic mechanisms and processes, the role of (extra)
pharmacological factors in these treatment modalities, which 
may contribute to optimizing treatment context, and lead to 
improved clinical responses and personal benefits. Despite 
the heterogeneity of substance, setting, and population, these 
studies also suggest that, in addition to a shared phenom-
enology, psychedelic treatments exhibit similar therapeutic 
processes and result in comparable outcomes. As this review 
demonstrates, qualitative research of psychedelic treatments 
can contribute to distinguishing specific features of these 
compounds, and show potential for elucidating otherwise 
undiscovered implications for the treatment of distinct men-
tal disorders.
Acknowledgments  The selection of databases and refinement of 
the search strategy was done in collaboration with medical informa-
tion specialists of the Central Medical Library at the University of 
Groningen.
Declarations 
Conflicts of Interest  Robert A. Schoevers received a research grant 
from the Netherlands Organization Health Research and Development 
for a clinical study on oral esketamine, and is the co-investigator of a 
clinical study on psilocybin funded by Compass Pathways. He has also 
received an educational grant from Janssen, Pharmaceutical Compa-
nies of Johnson and Johnson, and honorarium from Clexio Bioscienc-
es. Eric Vermetten is the principal investigator of a clinical trial on 
MDMA funded by the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic 
Studies. Joost J. Breeksema, Alistair R. Niemeijer and Erwin Krediet 
declare no conflicts of interest.
Funding  This study was made possible in part thanks to support from 
the Nypels-Tans PTSD fund at the Leiden University Medical Center. 
The fund had no role in the study design, collection, analysis or inter-
pretation of the data, writing the manuscript, or the decision to submit 
the paper for publication. This article was published open access thanks 
to an agreement between Springer Nature and the University Medical 
Center Groningen.
Ethics approval  Not applicable.
Consent to participate  Not applicable.
Consent for publication  Not applicable.
Availability of data and codes  Not applicable.
Author Contributions  JJB designed the study and conducted all lit-
erature searches. All articles were read and re-read closely by the first 
author. Primary analysis, categorization and extraction of relevant 
themes and quotes was also performed by JJB. Further iterations of 
categories were discussed between all authors. The final manuscript 
was written by JJB, and all authors contributed to and have approved 
the final manuscript.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, which permits any 
non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction 
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the 
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other 
third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons 
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regula-
tion or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit 
http://creat​iveco​mmons​.org/licen​ses/by-nc/4.0/.


942
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
Appendix 1
An overview of the included studies and scores according to the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) checklist: low, medium, high
Author(s)
1. Aims
Was there a 
clear state-
ment of the 
aims of the 
research?
2. Appro-
priateness
Is a qualita-
tive meth-
odology 
appropriate?
3. Research 
design
Was the 
research 
design 
appropriate 
to address the 
aims of the 
research?
4. Sampling
Was the 
recruitment 
strategy 
appropriate 
to the aims of 
the research?
5. Data collec-
tion
Were the data 
collected in 
a way that 
addressed the 
research issue?
6. Researcher 
role
Has the relation-
ship between 
researcher and 
participants 
been adequately 
considered?
7. Ethics
Have ethical 
issues been 
taken into 
considera-
tion?
8. Data 
analysis
Was the 
data analysis 
sufficiently 
rigorous?
9. Findings
Is there a 
clear state-
ment of 
findings?
10. Value 
How valuable 
is the
research?
Overall 
assessment
Loizaga-Velder 
and Verres 
(2014) [90]
High
High
High
High
Medium
Low
Low
Medium
High
High
Medium/
high
Gasser et al. 
(2015) [85]
Medium
High
High
High
High
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
High
Medium/
high
Lafrance et al. 
(2017) [87]
High
High
High
High
High
Medium
High
High
High
High
High
Schenberg et al. 
(2017) [78]
Low
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Low
Schenberg et al. 
(2017) [79]
High
High
High
Medium
High
High
High
Medium
Medium
High
Medium/
high
Belser et al. 
(2017) [82]
High
High
High
High
High
Medium
High
High
High
High
High
Swift et al. (2017) 
[81]
High
High
High
High
High
Low
High
Medium
High
High
High
Talin and Sanabria 
(2017) [89]
Medium
High
High
Low
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
Watts et al. (2017) 
[53]
Medium
High
High
High
High
High
High
Medium
High
High
High
Camlin et al. 
(2018) [86]
Medium
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
High
Medium
Medium
High
Medium
Nielson et al. 
(2018) [77]
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
Noorani et al. 
(2018) [83]
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
Renelli et al. 
(2018) [88]
High
High
High
High
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
High
High
High


943
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
Author(s)
1. Aims
Was there a 
clear state-
ment of the 
aims of the 
research?
2. Appro-
priateness
Is a qualita-
tive meth-
odology 
appropriate?
3. Research 
design
Was the 
research 
design 
appropriate 
to address the 
aims of the 
research?
4. Sampling
Was the 
recruitment 
strategy 
appropriate 
to the aims of 
the research?
5. Data collec-
tion
Were the data 
collected in 
a way that 
addressed the 
research issue?
6. Researcher 
role
Has the relation-
ship between 
researcher and 
participants 
been adequately 
considered?
7. Ethics
Have ethical 
issues been 
taken into 
considera-
tion?
8. Data 
analysis
Was the 
data analysis 
sufficiently 
rigorous?
9. Findings
Is there a 
clear state-
ment of 
findings?
10. Value 
How valuable 
is the
research?
Overall 
assessment
van Schalkwyk 
et al. (2018) [84]
High
High
High
High
High
High
Medium
High
High
High
High
Barone et al. 
(2019) [80]
Medium
Medium
Medium
High
High
High
High
Medium
High
High
Medium/
high
References
	 1.	 Bogenschutz MP, Forcehimes AA, Pommy JA, Wilcox CE, Bar-
bosa PCR, Strassman RJ. Psilocybin-assisted treatment for alco-
hol dependence: a proof-of-concept study. J Psychopharmacol. 
2015;29(3):289–99.
	 2.	 Dakwar E, Nunes EV, Hart CL, Hu MC, Foltin RW, Levin FR. 
A sub-set of psychoactive effects may be critical to the behav-
ioral impact of ketamine on cocaine use disorder: results from a 
randomized, controlled laboratory study. Neuropharmacology. 
2018;142:270–6.
	 3.	 Krupitsky EM, Grinenko AY. Ketamine psychedelic therapy 
(KPT): a review of the results of ten years of research. J Psycho-
active Drugs. 1997;29(2):165–83.
	 4.	 Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, Griffiths RR. 
Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR agonist psilocybin in the treatment 
of tobacco addiction. J Psychopharmacol. 2014;28(11):983–92.
	 5.	 Oehen P, Traber R, Widmer V, Schnyder U. A ran-
domized, controlled pilot study of MDMA 
(3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine)-assisted psychotherapy 
for treatment of resistant, chronic Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
(PTSD). J Psychopharmacol. 2013;27(1):40–52.
	 6.	 Bouso JC, Doblin R, Farré M, Alcázar MA, Gómez-Jarabo G. 
MDMA-assisted psychotherapy using low doses in a small sam-
ple of women with chronic posttraumatic stress disorder. J Psy-
choactive Drugs. 2008;40(3):225–36.
	 7.	 Ot’alora GM, Grigsby J, Poulter B, Van Derveer JW, Giron SG, 
Jerome L, et al. 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted 
psychotherapy for treatment of chronic posttraumatic stress dis-
order: a randomized phase 2 controlled trial. J Psychopharmacol. 
2018;32(12):1295–307.
	 8.	 Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, Jerome L, Doblin R. 
The safety and efficacy of ± 3,4-methylenedioxymethampheta-
mine- assisted psychotherapy in subjects with chronic, treatment-
resistant posttraumatic stress disorder: the first randomized con-
trolled pilot study. J Psychopharmacol. 2011;25(4):439–52.
	 9.	 Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, Jerome L, Martin SF, 
Yazar-Klosinski B, et al. Durability of improvement in post-trau-
matic stress disorder symptoms and absence of harmful effects 
or drug dependency after 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-
assisted psychotherapy: a prospective long-term follow-up study. 
J Psychopharmacol. 2013;27(1):28–39.
	 10.	 Mithoefer MC, Mithoefer AT, Feduccia AA, Jerome L, Wag-
ner M, Wymer J, et al. 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA)-assisted psychotherapy for post-traumatic stress dis-
order in military veterans, firefighters, and police officers: a ran-
domised, double-blind, dose-response, phase 2 clinical trial. The 
Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5(6):486–97.
	 11.	 Grob CS, Danforth AL, Chopra GS, Hagerty M, McKay CR, Hal-
berstadt AL, et al. Pilot study of psilocybin treatment for anxiety 
in patients with advanced-stage cancer. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2011;68(1):71–8.
	 12.	 Gasser P, Holstein D, Michel Y, Doblin R, Yazar-Klosinski B, 
Passie T, et al. Safety and efficacy of lysergic acid diethylamide-
assisted psychotherapy for anxiety associated with life-threaten-
ing diseases. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2014;202(7):513–20.
	 13.	 Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, Agin-Liebes G, Malone T, Cohen B, 
et al. Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilo-
cybin treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life-
threatening cancer: a randomized controlled trial. J Psychophar-
macol. 2016;30(12):1165–80.
	 14.	 Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Carducci MA, Umbricht A, Rich-
ards WA, Richards BD, et al. Psilocybin produces substantial 
and sustained decreases in depression and anxiety in patients 


944
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
with life-threatening cancer: a randomized double-blind trial. J 
Psychopharmacol. 2016;30(12):1181–97.
	 15.	 Danforth AL, Grob CS, Struble CM, Feduccia AA, Walker 
N, Jerome L, et al. Reduction in social anxiety after MDMA-
assisted psychotherapy with autistic adults: a randomized, dou-
ble-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. Psychopharmacology. 
2018;235(11):3137–48.
	 16.	 Moreno FA, Wiegand CB, Taitano EK, Delgado PL. Safety, toler-
ability, and efficacy of psilocybin in 9 patients with obsessive-
compulsive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(11):1735–40.
	 17.	 Palhano-Fontes F, Barreto D, Onias H, Andrade KC, Novaes 
MM, Pessoa JA, et al. Rapid antidepressant effects of the psyche-
delic ayahuasca in treatment-resistant depression: a randomized 
placebo-controlled trial. Psychol Med. 2019;49(4):655–63.
	 18.	 dos Santos RG, Sanches RF, de Osorio FL, Hallak JEC. Long-
term effects of ayahuasca in patients with recurrent depression: 
a 5-year qualitative follow-up. Arch Clin Psychiatry (São Paulo). 
2018;45(1):22–4.
	 19.	 Sanches RF, De Lima Osório F, Santos RGD, Macedo LRH, 
Maia-De-Oliveira JP, Wichert-Ana L, et al. Antidepressant 
effects of a single dose of ayahuasca in patients with recur-
rent depression a SPECT study. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2016;36(1):77–81.
	 20.	 Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, Day CMJ, Erritzoe 
D, Kaelen M, et al. Psilocybin with psychological support for 
treatment-resistant depression: an open-label feasibility study. 
The Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3(7):619–27.
	 21.	 Han Y, Chen J, Zou D, Zheng P, Li Q, Wang H, et al. Efficacy of 
ketamine in the rapid treatment of major depressive disorder: a 
meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
studies. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2016;12:2859–67.
	 22.	 Kishimoto T, Chawla JM, Hagi K, Zarate CA Jr, Kane JM, 
Bauer M, et al. Single-dose infusion ketamine and non-ketamine 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists for unipolar and bipo-
lar depression: a meta-analysis of efficacy, safety and time trajec-
tories. Psychol Med. 2016;46(7):1459–72.
	 23.	 Wilkinson ST, Katz RB, Toprak M, Webler R, Ostroff RB, Sana-
cora G. Acute and longer-term outcomes using ketamine as a 
clinical treatment at the Yale psychiatric hospital. J Clin Psy-
chiatry. 2018;79(4):17m11731.
	 24.	 Nichols DE. Hallucinogens. Pharmacol Ther. 
2004;101(2):131–81.
	 25.	 Nichols DE. Psychedelics. Pharmacol Rev. 2016;68(2):264–355.
	 26.	 Vollenweider FX, Kometer M. The neurobiology of psychedelic 
drugs: implications for the treatment of mood disorders. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2010;11(9):642–51.
	 27.	 Mathai DS, Meyer MJ, Storch EA, Kosten TR. The relationship 
between subjective effects induced by a single dose of ketamine 
and treatment response in patients with major depressive disor-
der: a systematic review. J Affect Disord. 2020;264:123–9.
	 28.	 Krediet E, Bostoen T, Breeksema J, van Schagen A, Pas-
sie T, Vermetten E. Reviewing the potential of psychedelics 
for the treatment of PTSD. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 
2020;23(6):385–400.
	 29.	 Roseman L, Nutt DJ, Carhart-Harris RL. Quality of acute 
psychedelic experience predicts therapeutic efficacy of psilo-
cybin for treatment-resistant depression. Front Pharmacol. 
2018;8(974):974.
	 30.	 Carhart-Harris RL, Roseman L, Haijen E, Erritzoe D, Watts R, 
Branchi I, et al. Psychedelics and the essential importance of 
context. J Psychopharmacol. 2018;32(7):725–31.
	 31.	 Rucker JJH, Jelen LA, Flynn S, Frowde KD, Young AH. Psych-
edelics in the treatment of unipolar mood disorders: a systematic 
review. J Psychopharmacol. 2016;30(12):1220–9.
	 32.	 dos Santos RG, Osório FL, Crippa JAS, Riba J, Zuardi AW, Hal-
lak JEC. Antidepressive, anxiolytic, and antiaddictive effects of 
ayahuasca, psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD): a 
systematic review of clinical trials published in the last 25 years. 
Ther Adv Psychopharmacol. 2016;6(3):193–213.
	 33.	 Johnson MW, Richards WA, Griffiths RR. Human halluci-
nogen research: guidelines for safety. J Psychopharmacol. 
2008;22(6):603–20.
	 34.	 Leary T, Lithwin GH, Metzner R. Reactions to psilocybin 
administered in a supportive environment. J Nerv Ment Dis. 
1963;137:561–73.
	 35.	 Hartogsohn I. Constructing drug effects: a history of set and set-
ting. Drug Sci Policy Law. 2017;3:1–17.
	 36.	 Hartogsohn I. Set and setting, psychedelics and the placebo 
response: an extra-pharmacological perspective on psychophar-
macology. J Psychopharmacol. 2016;30(12):1259–67.
	 37.	 Majic T, Schmidt TT, Gallinat J. Peak experiences and the after-
glow phenomenon: when and how do therapeutic effects of hal-
lucinogens depend on psychedelic experiences? J Psychophar-
macol. 2015;29(3):241–53.
	 38.	 Kaelen M. The psychological and human brain effects of music 
in combination with psychedelic drugs, Thesis. London: Impe-
rial College London; 2017. https​://spira​l.imper​ial.ac.uk/handl​
e/10044​/1/55900​.
	 39.	 Mithoefer MC, Doblin R, Mithoefer A, Jerome L, Ruse J, Gib-
son E, et al. A manual for MDMA-assisted psychotherapy in the 
treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Santa Cruz: MAPS; 
2013.
	 40.	 Labate BC, Cavnar C, editors. Therapeutic use of ayahuasca. 
Berlin: Springer; 2014.
	 41.	 Alper KR, Lotsof HS, Kaplan CD. The ibogaine medical subcul-
ture. J Ethnopharmacol. 2008;115(1):9–24.
	 42.	 Brown TK. Ibogaine in the treatment of substance dependence. 
Curr Drug Abuse Rev. 2013;6(1):3–16.
	 43.	 Noller GE, Frampton CM, Yazar-klosinski B. Ibogaine treat-
ment outcomes for opioid dependence from a twelve-month 
follow-up observational study. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 
2018;44(1):37–46.
	 44.	 Sanacora G, Frye MA, McDonald W, Mathew SJ, Turner MS, 
Schatzberg AF, et al. A consensus statement on the use of ket-
amine in the treatment of mood disorders. JAMA Psychiatry. 
2017;74(4):399–405.
	 45.	 Wagner MT, Mithoefer MC, Mithoefer AT, MacAulay 
RK, Jerome L, Yazar-Klosinski B, et al. Therapeutic effect 
of increased openness: investigating mechanism of action 
in MDMA-assisted psychotherapy. J Psychopharmacol. 
2017;31(8):967–74.
	 46.	 Erritzoe D, Roseman L, Nour MM, MacLean K, Kaelen M, Nutt 
DJ, et al. Effects of psilocybin therapy on personality structure. 
Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2018;138(5):368–78.
	 47.	 MacLean KA, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Mystical experiences 
occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocybin lead to increases 
in the personality domain of openness. J Psychopharmacol. 
2011;25(11):1453–61.
	 48.	 Carhart-Harris RL, Murphy K, Leech R, Erritzoe D, Wall MB, 
Ferguson B, et al. The effects of acutely administered 3,4-meth-
ylenedioxymethamphetamine on spontaneous brain function in 
healthy volunteers measured with arterial spin labeling and blood 
oxygen level-dependent resting state functional connectivity. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2015;78(8):554–62.
	 49.	 Carhart-Harris RL, Kaelen M, Whalley MG, Bolstridge M, Feild-
ing A, Nutt DJ. LSD enhances suggestibility in healthy volun-
teers. Psychopharmacology. 2014;232(4):785–94.
	 50.	 Hartogsohn I. The meaning-enhancing properties of psychedelics 
and their mediator role in psychedelic therapy, spirituality, and 
creativity. Front Neurosci. 2018;12:129.
	 51.	 Bogenschutz MP, Pommy JM. Therapeutic mechanisms of 
classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions: from 


945
Psychedelic Treatments for Psychiatric Disorders: A Systematic Review and Thematic Synthesis of Patient Experiences in Qualitative Studies
indirect evidence to testable hypotheses. Drug Test Anal. 
2012;4(7–8):543–55.
	 52.	 Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Haijen E, Kaelen M, Watts 
R. Psychedelics and connectedness. Psychopharmacology. 
2017;235(2):547–50.
	 53.	 Watts R, Day C, Krzanowski J, Nutt D, Carhart-Harris R. 
Patients’ accounts of increased “Connectedness” and “Accept-
ance” after psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression. J 
Humanist Psychol. 2017;57(5):520–64.
	 54.	 Watts R, Luoma JB. The use of the psychological flexibility 
model to support psychedelic assisted therapy. J Context Behav 
Sci. 2020;15:92–102.
	 55.	 Roseman L, Haijen E, Idialu-Ikato K, Kaelen M, Watts R, 
Carhart-Harris R. Emotional breakthrough and psychedelics: 
validation of the Emotional Breakthrough Inventory. J Psychop-
harmacol. 2019;33(9):1076–87.
	 56.	 Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Richards WA, Richards BD, McCann 
U, Jesse R. Psilocybin occasioned mystical-type experiences: 
immediate and persisting dose-related effects. Psychopharmacol-
ogy. 2011;218(4):649–65.
	 57.	 Griffiths RR, Richards WA, Johnson MW, McCann UD, Jesse 
R. Mystical-type experiences occasioned by psilocybin mediate 
the attribution of personal meaning and spiritual significance 
14 months later. J Psychopharmacol. 2008;22(6):621–32.
	 58.	 Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Potential therapeutic effects of psilo-
cybin. Neurotherapeutics. 2017;14(3):734–40.
	 59.	 Hendricks PS. Awe: a putative mechanism underlying the 
effects of classic psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy. Int Rev 
Psychiatry. 2018;30(4):331–42. https​://doi.org/10.1080/09540​
261.2018.14741​85.
	 60.	 Creswell JW. Qualitative inquiry & research design: choosing among 
five approaches. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 2013.
	 61.	 Green J, Thorogood N. Qualitative methods for health research. 
2nd ed. London: Sage Publications; 2009.
	 62.	 Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG. Preferred reporting 
items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA 
Statement. PLoS Med. 2009;62:1006–12.
	 63.	 Stern BC, Jordan Z. Developing the review question and inclu-
sion criteria. Am J Nurs. 2014;114(4):53–6.
	 64.	 Niemeijer AR. Exploring good care with surveillance technology 
in residential care for vulnerable people [PhD thesis]. Amster-
dam: Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam; 2015.
	 65.	 Barnett-page E, Thomas J. Methods for the synthesis of qualita-
tive research : a critical review. London; 2009 (NCRM Working 
Paper Series). Report No. 01/09. http://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Defau​
lt.aspx?tabid​=188%0AESR​C.
	 66.	 Noyes J, Booth A, Flemming K, Garside R, Harden A, Lewin S, 
Pantoja T, Hannes K, Cargo M, Thomas J. Cochrane Qualitative 
and Implementation Methods Group guidance series—paper 3: 
methods for assessing methodological limitations, data extraction 
and synthesis, and confidence in synthesized qualitative findings. 
J Clin Epidemiol. 2018(97):49–58.
	 67.	 Butler A, Hall RNH, Copnell B. A guide to writing a qualita-
tive systematic review protocol to enhance evidence-based prac-
tice in nursing and health care. Worldviews Evid Based Nurs. 
2016;13(3):241–9.
	 68.	 Carroll C, Booth A. Quality assessment of qualitative evi-
dence for systematic review and synthesis: is it meaningful, 
and if so, how should it be performed? Res Synth Methods. 
2015;6(2):149–54.
	 69.	 Garside R. Should we appraise the quality of qualitative research 
reports for systematic reviews, and if so, how? Innovation. 
2014;27(1):67–79.
	 70.	 Thomas J, Harden A. Methods for the thematic synthesis of qual-
itative research in systematic reviews. BMC Med Res Methodol. 
2008;8(45):1–10.
	 71.	 Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual 
Res Psychol. 2006;3(2):77–101.
	 72.	 Lockwood C, Porritt K, Munn Z, Rittenmeyer L, Salmond S, 
Bjerrum M, et al. Chapter 2: Systematic reviews of qualitative 
evidence. In: Aromataris E, Munn Z, editors. Joanna Briggs 
Institute Reviewer’s Manual. The Joanna Briggs Institute; 2017. 
https​://revie​wersm​anual​.joann​abrig​gs.org/.
	 73.	 Critical Appraisal Skills Programme. CASP Qualitative Check-
list. 2018. p. 1–6. [cited 12 May 2020]. https​://casp-uk.net/casp-
tools​-check​lists​/.
	 74.	 Greer G, Tolbert R. Subjective reports of the effects of MDMA 
in a clinical setting. J Psychoactive Drugs. 1986;18(4):319–27.
	 75.	 Bogenschutz MP, Podrebarac SK, Duane JH, Amegadzie SS, 
Malone TC, Owens LT, et al. Clinical interpretations of patient 
experience in a trial of psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy for 
alcohol use disorder. Front Pharmacol. 2018;9(100):1–7.
	 76.	 Malone TC, Mennenga SE, Guss J, Podrebarac SK, Owens LT, 
Bossis AP, et al. Individual Experiences in Four Cancer Patients 
Following Psilocybin-Assisted Psychotherapy. Front Pharmacol. 
2018;9(256):1–6.
	 77.	 Nielson EM, May DG, Forcehimes AA, Bogenschutz MP. The 
psychedelic debriefing in alcohol dependence treatment: illustrat-
ing key change phenomena through qualitative content analysis 
of clinical sessions. Front Pharmacol. 2018;9(132):1–13.
	 78.	 Schenberg EE, de Castro Comis MA, Alexandre JFM, Rasmussen 
Chaves BD, Tófoli LF, da Silveira DX. Treating drug dependence 
with the aid of ibogaine: a qualitative study. J Psychedelic Stud. 
2017;1(1):10–9.
	 79.	 Schenberg EE, de Castro Comis MA, Alexandre JFM, Tófoli LF, Ras-
mussen Chaves BD, da Silveira DX. A phenomenological analysis 
of the subjective experience elicited by ibogaine in the context of a 
drug dependence treatment. J Psychedelic Stud. 2017;1(2):1–10.
	 80.	 Barone W, Beck J, Mitsunaga-Whitten M, Perl P. Perceived 
benefits of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy beyond symptom 
reduction: qualitative follow-up study of a clinical trial for indi-
viduals with treatment-resistant PTSD. J Psychoactive Drugs. 
2019;51(2):199–208.
	 81.	 Swift TC, Belser AB, Agin-Liebes G, Devenot NN, Terrana S, 
Friedman HL, et al. Cancer at the dinner table: experiences of 
psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy for the treatment of cancer-
related distress. J Humanist Psychol. 2017;57(5):488–519.
	 82.	 Belser AB, Agin-Liebes G, Swift TC, Terrana S, Devenot N, 
Friedman HL, et al. Patient experiences of psilocybin-assisted 
psychotherapy: an interpretative phenomenological analysis. J 
Humanist Psychol. 2017;57(4):354–88.
	 83.	 Noorani T, Garcia-Romeu A, Swift TC, Griffiths RR, John-
son MW. Psychedelic therapy for smoking cessation: quali-
tative analysis of participant accounts. J Psychopharmacol. 
2018;32(7):756–69.
	 84.	 van Schalkwyk GI, Wilkinson ST, Davidson L, Silverman WK, 
van Sanacora GGIS, et al. Acute psychoactive effects of intra-
venous ketamine during treatment of mood disorders: analysis 
of the Clinician Administered Dissociative State Scale. J Affect 
Disord. 2017;227:6–11.
	 85.	 Gasser P, Kirchner K, Passie T. LSD-assisted psychotherapy for 
anxiety associated with a life-threatening disease: a qualitative 
study of acute and sustained subjective effects. J Psychopharma-
col. 2015;29(1):57–68.
	 86.	 Camlin TJ, Eulert D, Thomas Horvath A, Bucky SF, Barsuglia 
JP, Polanco M. A phenomenological investigation into the lived 
experience of ibogaine and its potential to treat opioid use disor-
ders. J Psychedelic Stud. 2018;2(1):24–35.
	 87.	 Lafrance A, Loizaga-Velder A, Fletcher J, Renelli M, Files N, 
Tupper KW, et al. Nourishing the spirit: exploratory research on 
ayahuasca experiences along the continuum of recovery from 
eating disorders. J Psychoactive Drugs. 2017;49(5):427–35.


946
	
J. J. Breeksema et al.
	 88.	 Renelli M, Fletcher J, Tupper KW, Files N, Loizaga-Velder 
A, Lafrance A. An exploratory study of experiences with 
conventional eating disorder treatment and ceremonial aya-
huasca for the healing of eating disorders. Eat Weight Disord. 
2020;25(2):437–44.
	 89.	 Talin P, Sanabria E. Ayahuasca’s entwined efficacy: an eth-
nographic study of ritual healing from ‘addiction’. Int J Drug 
Policy. 2017;44:23–30.
	 90.	 Loizaga-Velder A, Verres R. Therapeutic effects of ritual aya-
huasca use in the treatment of substance dependence: qualitative 
results. J Psychoactive Drugs. 2014;46(1):63–72.
	 91.	 Watts R, Day C, Krzanowski J, Nutt D, Carhart-Harris R. 
Patients’ accounts of increased “connectedness” and “accept-
ance” after psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression. J Hum 
Psychol. 2017;57(5):520–64.
	 92.	 Liu Y, Lin D, Wu B, Zhou W. Ketamine abuse potential and use 
disorder. Brain Res Bull. 2016;126:68–73.
	 93.	 Morgan CJA, Curran HV. Ketamine use: a review. Addiction. 
2011;107:27–38.
	 94.	 Winkelman MJ. Psychedelics as medicines for substance abuse 
rehabilitation: evaluating treatments with LSD, peyote, ibogaine 
and ayahuasca. Curr Drug Abuse Rev. 2014;7(2):101–16.
	 95.	 Maj M. “Psychiatric comorbidity”: an artefact of current diag-
nostic systems? Br J Psychiatry. 2005;186:182–4.
	 96.	 The Brainstorm Consortium. Analysis of shared her-
itability in common disorders of the brain. Science. 
2018;360(6395):eaap8757.
	 97.	 Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, Heinssen R, Pine D, Quinn K, 
et al. Research Domain Criteria (RDoC): toward a new classifica-
tion framework for research on mental disorders. Am J Psychia-
try Online. 2010;167(7):748–51.
	 98.	 Kendell R, Jablensky A. Distinguishing between the validity and 
utility of psychiatric diagnoses. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160:4–12.
	 99.	 Jablensky A. Psychiatric classifications: validity and utility. 
World Psychiatry. 2016;15(1):26–31.
	100.	 Kendler KS. The phenomenology of major depression and the 
representativeness and nature of DSM criteria. Am J Psychiatry. 
2016;173(8):771–80.
	101.	 Smoller JW, Andreassen OA, Edenberg HJ, Faraone SV, Glatt SJ, 
Kendler KS. Psychiatric genetics and the structure of psychopa-
thology. Mol Psychiatry. 2019;24(3):409–20.
	102.	 Krupitsky E, Kolp E, Winkelman MJ, Roberts TB. Ketamine 
psychedelic psychotherapy. In: Winkelman MJ, Roberts TB, 
editors. Psychedelic medicine: new evidence for hallucinogenic 
substances as treatments, vol. 2. Westport, CT: Praeger Publish-
ers/Greenwood Publishing Group; 2007. p. 67–85.
	103.	 Veen C, Jacobs G, Philippens I, Vermetten E. Subanesthetic 
dose ketamine in posttraumatic stress disorder: a role for recon-
solidation during trauma-focused psychotherapy? In: Vermetten 
E, Baker DG, Risbrough VB, editors. Behavioral neurobiology 
of PTSD. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018. p. 
137–62.
	104.	 Dakwar E, Nunes EV, Hart CL, Foltin RW, Mathew SJ, Car-
penter KM, et al. A single ketamine infusion combined with 
mindfulness-based behavioral modification to treat cocaine 
dependence: a randomized clinical trial. Am J Psychiatry. 
2019;176(11):923–30.
	105.	 Barrett FS, Preller KH, Kaelen M. Psychedelics and music: 
neuroscience and therapeutic implications. Int Rev Psychiatry. 
2018;30(4):350–62.
	106.	 Kaelen M, Giribaldi B, Raine J, Evans L, Timmermann C, 
Rodriguez N, et al. The hidden therapist: evidence for a cen-
tral role of music in psychedelic therapy. Psychopharmacology. 
2018;235(2):505–19.
	107.	 Kazdin AE. Mediators and mechanisms of change in psycho-
therapy research. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2007;3(1):1–27.
	108.	 Pahnke WN. The psychedelic mystical experience in the human 
encounter with death. Psychedelic Rev. 1970;11(1):3–20.
	109.	 Richards WA, Rhead JC, Dileo FB, Yensen R, Kurland AA. The 
peak experience variable in DPT-assisted psychotherapy with 
cancer patients. J Psychoactive Drugs. 1977;9(1):1–10.
	110.	 Grof S, Goodman LE, Richards WA, Kurland AA. LSD-assisted 
psychotherapy in patients with terminal cancer. Int Pharmacopsy-
chiatry. 1973;8(3):129–44.
	111.	 Dakwar E, Anerella C, Hart CL, Levin FR, Mathew SJ, Nunes 
EV. Therapeutic infusions of ketamine: do the psychoactive 
effects matter? Drug Alcohol Depend. 2014;136(1):153–7.
	112.	 Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR, Johnson MW. Psilocybin-occa-
sioned mystical experiences in the treatment of tobacco addic-
tion. Curr Drug Abuse Rev. 2014;7(3):157–64.
	113.	 Preller KH, Vollenweider FX. Phenomenology, structure, and 
dynamic of psychedelic states. In: Halberstadt AL, Vollenwei-
der FX, Nichols DE, editors. current topics in behavioral neuro-
sciences behavioral neurobiology of psychedelic drugs. 1st ed. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag GmbH; 2018. p. 221–56.
	114.	 Barrett FS, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Neuroticism is associated 
with challenging experiences with psilocybin mushrooms. Pers 
Individ Dif. 2017;117:155–60.
	115.	 Barrett FS, Bradstreet MP, Leoutsakos J-MS, Johnson MW, Grif-
fiths RR. The challenging experience questionnaire: characteri-
zation of challenging experiences with psilocybin mushrooms. J 
Psychopharmacol. 2016;30(12):1279–95.
	116.	 Carbonaro TM, Bradstreet MP, Barrett FS, MacLean KA, Jesse 
R, Johnson MW, et al. Survey study of challenging experi-
ences after ingesting psilocybin mushrooms: acute and endur-
ing positive and negative consequences. J Psychopharmacol. 
2016;30(12):1268–78.
	117.	 Brown TK, Alper K. Treatment of opioid use disorder with ibo-
gaine: detoxification and drug use outcomes. Am J Drug Alcohol 
Abuse. 2018;44(1):24–36.
	118.	 van Emmerik-van Oortmerssen K, van de Glind G, van den Brink 
W, Smit F, Crunelle CL, Swets M, et al. Prevalence of attention-
deficit hyperactivity disorder in substance use disorder patients: 
a meta-analysis and meta-regression analysis. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2012;122(1–2):11–9.
	119.	 Preuss UW, Gouzoulis-Mayfrank E, Havemann-Reinecke U, 
Schäfer I, Beutel M, Hoch E, et al. Psychiatric comorbidity in 
alcohol use disorders: results from the German S3 guidelines. 
Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2018;268(3):219–29.
	120.	 Kingston REF, Marel C, Mills KL. A systematic review of the 
prevalence of comorbid mental health disorders in people pre-
senting for substance use treatment in Australia. Drug Alcohol 
Rev. 2017;36(4):527–39.
	121.	 Jané-Llopis E, Matytsina I. Mental health and alcohol, drugs and 
tobacco: a review of the comorbidity between mental disorders 
and the use of alcohol, tobacco and illicit drugs. Drug Alcohol 
Rev. 2006;25(6):515–36.
	122.	 Sessa B. MDMA and PTSD treatment: “PTSD: from novel 
pathophysiology to innovative therapeutics”. Neurosci Lett. 
2017;649:176–80.
	123.	 Fanelli D, Costas R, Ioannidis JPA. Meta-assessment of bias in 
science. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2017;114(14):3714–9.
	124.	 Nichols DE, Johnson MW, Nichols CD. Psychedelics as 
medicines: an emerging new paradigm. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2017;101(2):209–19.
	125.	 Insel T, Cuthbert B. Brain disorders? Precisely. Science. 
2015;348(6234):499–500.
	126.	 Caspi A, Moffitt TE. All for one and one for all: mental disorders 
in one dimension. Am J Psychiatry. 2018;175(9):831–44.
	127.	 Kazdin AE. Understanding how and why psychotherapy leads to 
change. Psychother Res. 2009;19(4–5):418–28.
