Ketamine Enhanced Psychotherapy:
Preliminary Clinical Observations on Its
Effectiveness in Treating Alcoholism
Eli Kolp
Private Practice
Tampa, Florida
Harris L. Friedman
University of Florida
Saybrook Graduate School
M. Scott Young
Florida Mental Health Institute
University of South Florida
Evgeny Krupitsky
St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University
Russia
Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic widely used by physicians in the United States
and also a psychedelic drug that physicians can legally prescribe off-label within the
United States for other therapeutic purposes. It has been used in Russia and else-
where to successfully treat alcoholism and other psychological or psychiatric prob-
lems, but has not been researched for this purpose in the United States. Results of a
series of clinical trials using ketamine for treating alcoholism in the United States are
retrospectively reported, along with 2 case studies of how psychotherapy facilitated
by this substance helped two individuals achieve abstinence through ketamine’s
transpersonal effects. Considering the massive problems caused by alcoholism, the
need to begin formal research studies on ketamine psychotherapy for alcoholism is
emphasized.
THE HUMANISTIC PSYCHOLOGIST, 34(4), 399–422
Copyright © 2006, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Correspondence should be addressed to Harris L. Friedman, 1255 Tom Coker Road, SW, Labelle,
FL 33935. E-mail: harrisfriedman@floraglades.org


Alcoholism is undeniably one of the most destructive and costly problems that hu-
mans face, and most conventional efforts to treat it have, at best, achieved only
modest success (Miller et al., 1995; Nathan, 1986). In fact, alcohol is the number
one drug of abuse in the United States and, according to the National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA, 2004), more than 115 million Ameri-
cans use alcohol on a regular basis and nearly 17.6 million adult Americans either
suffer from alcoholism or have serious alcohol-related problems. Alcohol use is
associated with liver disease, cancer, cardiovascular disease, fetal alcohol syn-
drome, highway fatalities, accidents, and suicide. NIAAA has estimated that
around 200,000 deaths each year could be attributed to alcohol-related disorders
and estimates of the total economic cost to the United States from alcoholism and
alcohol-related problems are approximately $185 billion per year.
Numerous studies have suggested, however, that the medical use of psyche-
delic drugs can effectively be used to treat alcoholism (e.g., Abramson, 1967;
Grinspoon, 1986; Pahnke, Kurland, Unger, Savage, & Grof, 1970; Yensen &
Dryer, 1993/1994). Unfortunately, the medical use of these powerful substances
has been rejected in the United States, and most Western contexts, due to the costly
“war on drugs,” which has exaggerated psychedelics’ potential for harm (e.g., see
Cornwell & Linders, 2002) and extracted a huge cost on many individuals, as well
as society as a whole (e.g., see Miron, 2004). This effort at suppressing psychedel-
ics also minimized their potential value as “medicine,” even though there is volu-
minous research literature on the therapeutic efficacy and safety of psychedelic
drugs when used by medical professionals for treating numerous psychological
and psychiatric difficulties (Friedman, 2006). Our article focuses on the clinical
potential of one psychedelic drug, ketamine hydrochloride (ketamine), for the
treatment of alcoholism, as well as presents informally collected pilot data of its
use for that purpose, as well as two case studies of its effective use.
Ketamine is a rapid-acting, nonnarcotic, nonbarbiturate drug, which produces
extremely effective analgesia (e.g., it was the most widely used battlefield anes-
thetic in Viet Nam) and, since the 1970s, it has been commonly used in clinics and
hospitals as an anesthetic due to its rapid onset and short duration of action, as well
as its demonstrated safety (White, Way, & Trevor, 1982). In addition, ketamine is
widely used at low doses for treatment of so-called breakthrough pain in patients
with acute and chronic pain (due to its exceptional analgesic properties) and for
management of neuropathic pain disorder, ischaemic limb pain disorder, refrac-
tory cancer pain, and as an adjunct to standard opioid therapy, as well as by emer-
gency departments as a pediatric sedation tool for use with acutely injured children
(Carr et al., 2004; Ellis, Husain, Saetta, & Walker, 2004; Green & Krauss, 2004;
Howes, 2004; McGlone, Howes, & Joshi, 2004).
A key issue for any clinical, or research on the clinical, use of ketamine regards
its safety. Many clinical studies have failed to detect any long-term impairment as a
consequence of ketamine use (Siegel, 1978). Much of the more recent work on this
400
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY


topic that failed to find significant safety risks employed very sophisticated meth-
ods to examine subtle signs of damage related to ketamine use, such as through
thoroughly searching for signs of neuropsychological problems (Karst, Wiese,
Emrich, & Schneider, 2005), behavioral sensitization (i.e., referring to progressive
changes in behavior related to repeated exposure to a drug; Cho et al., 2005), and
various miscellaneous problems as observed through “tests of episodic and seman-
tic memory, schizophrenic-like and dissociative symptoms, response inhibition
and measures of subjective effects, including mood, bodily symptoms and enjoy-
ment of and desire for the drug” (Morgan, Mofeez, Brandner, Bromley, & Curran,
2004, p. 298). There is also considerable basic scientific research occurring on
ketamine in the United States that uses both normal volunteers (Parwani et al.,
2005), as well as pathological groups such as schizophrenic (e.g., Holcomb,
Medoff, Cullen, & Taminga, 2005) and ketamine-abusing (e.g., Morgan et al.,
2006) volunteers. That this basic research is occurring at major universities that
have approved researching ketamine with both normal and pathological volunteers
(and these numerous studies have presumably gone through institutional review
board and other types of intensive scrutiny as required in these settings) suggests
that ketamine can be safely used for clinical studies of its effectiveness for treating
human psychological and psychiatric problems, such as alcoholism. One U.S. re-
searcher, Krystal, is particularly noteworthy for leading a team of numerous inves-
tigators over many years in studying the biochemical aspects of ketamine, primar-
ily focusing on perceptual and cognitive functioning (e.g., Krystal et al., 1994), but
his group of investigators have also completed clinical studies that documented
some antidepressant effects of ketamine (Berman et al., 2000). It should be noted
that one of us (Krupitsky) has collaborated in researching ketamine psycho-
pharmacology at Yale with Krystal (e.g., Krupitsky et al., 2001; Krystal et al.,
2003). Despite ample evidence supporting the safety of ketamine when employed
medically and in research settings, it is important to note that, when used recre-
ationally in uncontrolled settings, such as at so-called raves, ketamine can lead to
significant medical problems, such as excessive sedation and respiratory depres-
sion, especially if combined with depressants like alcohol, Valium, or gamma
hydroxybutyrate (Ricuarte, 2005). Consequently, this article should not be inter-
preted as endorsing the use of ketamine in any way other than for research or clini-
cal applications by qualified professionals.
Although there is a great deal of ongoing research on ketamine in the United
States, as well as its widespread medical usage as an anesthetic, we do not know of
any current work examining ketamine’s usefulness for the treatment of psycholog-
ical or psychiatric problems, such as alcoholism and other drug addictions. There
is little doubt that this is due to the fact that ketamine is being frequently seen not
only as a dissociative anesthetic, but also as a psychedelic—meaning that it does
not cause physiological dependence while reliably causing powerful alterations in
consciousness (e.g., in mood, perception, and thought) in a way similar to what of-
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
401


ten occurs during dreaming, memory flashbacks, psychoses, and mystical experi-
ences (Grinspoon & Bakalar, 1979). That there has been a long-standing pro-
hibition on psychedelic research in the United States is well-known, although
interestingly many research studies on the clinical effectiveness of psychedelics
are now resuming in the United States (Friedman, 2006). One fact that makes
ketamine especially interesting as a psychedelic drug for research and clinical
practice is that it is currently legal for medical practitioners to use in the United
States now (i.e., it can be legally prescribed “off-label”1 by physicians for psy-
chotherapeutic purposes, such as for the treatment of alcoholism). This legal status
may greatly facilitate avoiding problems with getting approval for ketamine’s use
in formal clinical research, as is the case with other psychedelics that require sur-
mounting numerous bureaucratic hurdles, as well as encourage other professionals
to explore its clinical potential through off-label use.
MECHANISMS OF KETAMINE
There is considerable divergence of opinion regarding how psychedelic substances
in general might work beneficially within clinical settings. Most of the research
currently occurring in the United States now views the active mechanisms of such
substances solely from a biochemical perspective through which psychedelics are
primarily seen as psychotomimetic agents affecting levels of key neuro-
transmitters, such as serotonin. Ketamine is particularly interesting in this way be-
cause, as a glutamate glutamatergic N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist, it
is often considered a more appropriate model of psychosis than serotonergic hallu-
cinogens (e.g., lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD], psilocybin, and N,N-dimethyl-
402
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY
1“‘Off-label use’ means that a prescription drug is being prescribed for a purpose not listed on the
product’s label. This is a common and acceptable practice by doctors. When done under a doctor’s care,
off-label use of prescription drugs is legal and may be vital for optimal care in many disorders. The
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) allows off-label use for prescription drugs it has already ap-
proved for marketing. This is permitted because the FDA approval process for any new prescription
drug is very comprehensive. Rigorous testing is required to determine if a drug is safe and if it actually
works for the disease or condition for which it is approved. The drug approval process is expensive and
lengthy—often taking years for a drug to be thoroughly studied. For this reason, it is often not practical
for the manufacturer to study more than a single use of a drug. This is why manufacturers typically mar-
ket new medications for one specific condition. After approval by the FDA, it is not uncommon for re-
search on a drug to continue. Over time, doctors and scientists may find that the drug is useful for addi-
tional conditions. If such a use is discovered, but doesn’t go through the FDA approval process, the
drug’s manufacturer is not allowed to advertise or promote the drug for the new use. But doctors and re-
searchers are allowed to share such information with each other and the public. Off-label use is up to a
doctor’s discretion. It is your doctor’s responsibility to be well-informed about a drug before prescrib-
ing it for off-label use. This includes knowing about potential side effects and drug interactions.” (Mayo
Clinic, no date, n.p.).


tryptamine [DMT]), prompting U.S. investigators to use ketamine-induced phe-
nomena as a preferred model for studying psychoses in experimental research
(Krystal et al., 1994).
In addition to approaching ketamine’s mechanism as working primarily through
neurotransmitters from a biochemical perspective, there are various other neuro-
biological mechanisms through which psychedelics may be operating. One fasci-
nating strand of research suggests that hallucinations from ayahuasca may possi-
bly be due to altered cortical oscillations in the visual pathway, a higher order (i.e.,
top-down as well as bottom-up) mechanism that these researchers speculated may
also be activated with other psychedelics (Frecska, White, & Luna, 2003, 2004).
Vollenweider (1992–1993) suggested, from positron emission tomography data,
that ketamine appears to stimulate different cortical regions as compared to other
psychedelic drugs (e.g., psilocybin) and schizophrenia (for which ketamine is,
once more, often used as a model). It is concluded that the neurobiological mecha-
nisms by which ketamine and other psychedelics operate are quite complex and
not fully understood. This is despite that most research assumes relatively simple
biological mechanisms for their actions (see Friedman, 2006).
In addition to producing analgesia, ketamine also produces other phenomena
that warrant it being seen as a psychedelic, some of which can be seen as
transpersonal (e.g., feelings of ego dissolution and loss of identity, intense visions,
experience of the psychological death and rebirth of the ego, and feelings of cos-
mic unity with humanity, nature, the universe, and God); though these emergence
phenomena of a transpersonal nature have been documented by multiple studies,
they do not appear to cause lasting psychological problems for patients (White,
Way, & Trevor, 1982). In fact, it is interesting to speculate that psychedelic drugs
such as ketamine might be primarily useful due to their transpersonal, rather than
neurobiological effects (e.g., see Friedman, 2006). This is also congruent with the
conclusions of many that spiritual factors are crucial in treating alcoholism (e.g.,
Amodia, Cano, & Eliason, 2005; Robinson, Brower, & Kurtz, 2003).
Grof (1980, 1984) has perhaps developed the most comprehensive theory of
psychedelic psychotherapy from this perspective. He wrote that psychedelics fa-
cilitate therapeutic experiences of symbolic death and rebirth of the ego, allowing
clients to work through deep traumatic fixations in their unconscious. Grof de-
signed a specific psychedelic psychotherapeutic approach, which he applied suc-
cessfully with more than 750 patients. In this, he discouraged his clients from ana-
lyzing their psychological problems or clinical symptoms; instead, he assisted
them in transcending their inflexible maladjustive patterns, placing a strong em-
phasis on their transpersonal growth potential.
This leads to another specific advantage that ketamine has over other psyche-
delic substances (i.e., in addition to it being legally available through off-label pre-
scription), namely its ability to reliably replicate near-death experiences (NDEs;
Grinspoon & Bakalar, 1981; Lilly, 1988). For example, research in the United
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
403


Kingdom analyzed similarities between ketamine-induced transpersonal experi-
ence and NDEs, concluding that the intramuscular administration of 150–200 mg
of ketamine can reproduce all of the features commonly associated with NDEs
(Jansen, 1997, 2001). Also similar to NDEs, psychedelic ketamine experiences ap-
pear to be very transformative and can induce changes in spiritual development
and worldview (Ring, 1984). Due to ketamine’s availability for medical use in the
United States now and its ability to reliably cause NDEs, which provides a plausi-
ble transpersonal mechanism to discuss its possible efficacy, it presents as an ideal
psychedelic to research in the United States, especially because ketamine’s clinical
applications for successfully treating psychological and psychiatric problems have
long been supported by research outside of the United States. Regarding the
transpersonal mechanism that may be operating with ketamine, we speculate that it
concerns the NDEs, which provides an opportunity for an intense life review that
aids decision making and powerful experiential shifts in attitudes toward sobriety.
HISTORY OF KETAMINE IN PSYCHOTHERAPY
A number of international psychiatric investigators have utilized psychothera-
peutic treatment with ketamine to create abreactive effects in psychotherapy. In
Iran, ketamine narcopsychotherapy was shown very effective in treating various
psychiatric disorders (Khorramzadeh & Lofty, 1973). Khorramzadeh adminis-
tered ketamine to 100 psychiatric patients with various psychiatric and psychoso-
matic diagnoses, including depression, anxiety, phobias, obsessive–compulsive
neurosis, conversion reaction, hypochondriasis, hysteria, tension headaches, and
ulcerative colitis. He reported that 91 of his patients were doing well after 6
months, and 88 of the subjects remained well after 1 year. Khorramzadeh con-
cluded that ketamine’s abreactive or cathartic effect was related to its mind-ex-
panding qualities. In Argentina, Fontana used ketamine as an adjunct to anti-
depressive psychotherapy to facilitate regression to a prenatal level through a
disintegration and death experience, which was followed with a progression expe-
rience that was seen as similar to a rebirth (Fontana, 1974). He emphasized the ad-
vantages of ketamine, which made it possible to achieve deep levels of regression.
In Mexico, Roquet was the first clinician to employ ketamine psychedelic psycho-
therapy in a group setting (Roquet, 1974). He combined psychoanalytical tech-
nique with the healing practices of Mexican Indian ceremonies and created a new
approach to psychedelic psychotherapy that he called “psychosynthesis” and
which he used to mostly treat neurotic patients, although he described some suc-
cess with personality disorders and selected psychotic patients.
Krupitsky first began using ketamine in the former Soviet Union in 1985 for
treatment of alcoholism. He developed Ketamine Psychedelic Therapy (KPT) and
treated more than 1,000 patients without complications. In one of his many con-
404
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY


trolled studies, nearly 70% of his ketamine-treated patients remained abstinent
from alcohol during a 1-year follow-up, in contrast to only 24% abstinence
achieved in a control group treated with a more traditional form of therapy
(Krupitsky et al., 1992). In a comprehensive clinical research review on this sub-
ject, he (Krupitsky & Grinenko, 1997) concluded that KPT is a safe and effective
treatment for alcoholism and other drug dependencies, such as heroin and ephed-
rine, as well as effective for treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder, reactive de-
pression, neurotic disorders, avoidant personality disorders, and was somewhat ef-
fective for the treatment of phobic neurosis, obsessive–compulsive neurosis, and
histrionic personality disorder. Krupitsky and his colleagues (Krupitsky et al.,
2002) recently conducted a double-blind randomized clinical trial comparing the
relative effectiveness of high- (2.0 mg/kg IM) to low- (0.2 mg/kg IM) dose admin-
istrations of ketamine for the psychotherapeutic treatment of heroin addiction;
2-year follow-up data indicated that high-dose ketamine was more effective. Un-
fortunately, recent changes in the regulations governing such research in Russia
have now brought Krupitsky’s pioneering research efforts to a halt.
KETAMINE-ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
Inspired by Krupitsky, Kolp engaged in the clinical treatment of alcoholic clients
using what he called ketamine-enhanced psychotherapy (KEP). His approach was
explicitly meant to replicate Krupitsky’s pioneering work and to extend it into an-
other cultural context, the United States. As with Krupitsky’s KPT technique,
Kolp’s KEP explicitly relied on the transpersonal effects of ketamine to facilitate
psychotherapeutic change.
Although, once more, most psychedelic drugs are illegal to use in the United
States, ketamine is a notable exception because it is readily available to physicians
as an anesthetic that can be legally used off-label for psychiatric treatment. Conse-
quently, Kolp employed ketamine in his private psychiatric practice in the United
States from the fall of 1996 through the spring of 1999, administering it to more
than 70 clients. This article summarizes how ketamine was used in this way and
provides Kolp’s informal retrospective observations on its effectiveness for treat-
ing alcoholism and other coexisting disorders. We emphasize that these clinical
administrations were not conducted in a formal research context due to the wide-
spread ban on psychedelic studies in the United States so, unfortunately, the origi-
nal files on these clients are no longer available; however, in light of the recent re-
surgence of psychedelic research in the United States and our plans, as a research
team, to now seek institutional review board approval and grant funding for for-
mally pursuing studies on ketamine’s effectiveness on alcoholism in the United
States, a reporting of Kolp’s empirical clinical observations is seen as warranted.
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
405


Because all data presented here are based solely on Kolp’s reconstruction of his
work, this report may have some inaccuracies and cannot be independently evalu-
ated since the original data are missing.2 As mentioned previously, there is a lack
of any known formal research in the United States exploring ketamine’s potential
for clinical applications in treating psychological or psychiatric problems, such as
alcoholism; this lack is seen as warranting the publication of informally collected
pilot data, despite that it does not meet the usual standards of such research. It
should also be viewed in the context that most reports in the United States on
ketamine’s possible efficacy for treating psychological and psychiatric problems
are anecdotal case studies, such as the recent report of a severely depressed patient
who was supposed to be treated with two sessions of electroconvulsive therapy
(ECT) in which ketamine was used as anesthesia, which is common due to
ketamine’s low anticonvulsant effects; the patient reported dramatic improvement
in her mood, even though it was determined later that no ECT had actually been
provided due to a procedural malfunction, suggesting ketamine alone might be ef-
fective in this context (Ostroff, Gonzales, & Sanacora, 2005).
METHOD, RESULTS, AND PRELIMINARY DISCUSSION
Because this pilot data was collected informally and progressed through many iter-
ations in method, the various methods along with their results are sequentially dis-
cussed in this section. The clients Kolp treated were both males and females, all
within 21–64 years old, who identified alcohol as their drug of choice and satis-
fied the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition
(DSM–IV; American Psychiatric Association, 1994), criteria for alcohol depend-
ence. Kolp followed all patients treated with KEP for as long as they continued the
treatment and had individual and group sessions with them on a regular basis, from
once a month to once every 3 months. In addition to being diagnosed with alcohol-
406
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY
2Kolp received approval to conduct research on ketamine-assisted therapy on alcoholism in 1996
through the James A. Haley Veterans Hospital in Tampa, but implementation of this research was de-
layed until the fall of 1999 due to organizational restructuring. Subsequently, he did not conduct formal
clinical studies but, while waiting for the changes at the VA Hospital to enable this research to take
place, he began using KEP in his private practice. He did not keep formal research files on his private
KEP patients, as that was not required for solely clinical work. Unfortunately, he sustained serious inju-
ries in March 1999 that left him totally disabled until June 2002, during which time he retired from pri-
vate practice and granted custody of his medical records to another psychiatrist for continuation of pa-
tients’care, as it is required by the law. After Kolp returned to a part-time private practice in June 2002,
he learned that the selected custodian of these records had moved out of the area without any forward-
ing address and attempts to contact him proved unsuccessful. These data are now being presented to
lend substantiation to what was at first only anecdotal evidence in the form of Kolp’s informal commu-
nications to this articles’coauthors, who felt it was important for him to reconstruct his work as best as it
could be done.


ism, Kolp estimated that 90% of his clients had concurrent addictions (e.g., to caf-
feine, sugars, fats, nicotine, cannabis, benzodiazepines, opiates, and amphet-
amines) and nearly half had coexisting psychological problems (e.g., generalized
anxiety disorder, social phobias, primary insomnias, acute and repeated stress dis-
orders, pain disorder, panic disorder, depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress dis-
order, tension and migraine headaches, somatization disorder, and chronic fatigue
syndrome). The following section describes the five different courses of treatment
employed by Kolp and their outcomes, which are summarized in Table 1. The
Krupitsky et al. (1992) study was used as a benchmark to guide Kolp’s work. In
that study, 186 alcoholic male patients were divided into two groups, 86 who re-
ceived ketamine and a control group of 100. After 1 year postcompletion of this
ketamine intervention, 60 participants (69.8%) were fully abstinent from alcohol,
24 (27.9%) had relapsed, whereas data were missing from 2 (2.3%); in the control
group, abstinence from the use of alcohol was observed in only 24 participants
(24%), whereas the remainder continued abusing alcohol.
Method 1: Individual Outpatient Treatment Without
Residential Component
Initially, KEP was offered as part of a time-limited individual outpatient treatment
that consisted of 10 sessions administered in the following stages:
Session 1
Assessment for appropriateness of treatment with KEP.
Sessions 2–5
Establishment of a therapeutic alliance and preparation for
the transpersonal experience.
Session 6
Formulation of the psychospiritual goal for the ketamine
session.
Session 7
Induction of the transpersonal experience through the
administration of ketamine.
Sessions 8–10
Integration of the transpersonal experience.
The course of treatment was structured on a weekly basis with one session per
week. Sessions 1–6 and 8–10 were 50 min long and session 7 (ketamine adminis-
tration) was 3 hr long. For a few clients who had to commute a significant distance
to receive KEP, the timeframe was shortened and sessions were conducted more
intensively (i.e., from two to five sessions per week). Altogether, KEP was admin-
istered to approximately 20 patients in a framework of an individual treatment on
an outpatient basis.
Results and discussion 1.
The initial success rate obtained was signifi-
cantly lower than the one reported by Krupitsky (1992). Kolp using method 1 only
achieved an abstinence rate of approximately 25% at the end of the 1st year, which
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
407


408
TABLE 1
KEP Treatment Method Summary
KEP
Method
Number
Modality
Approximate
Number of
Patients Treated
Number of
Ketamine
Administrations
Number of
Sessions
Session
Timing
Change from Previous
KEP Method
Approximate
1 Year Abstinence
Rate (%)
1
Individual outpatient
treatment without
residential component
20
1
10 weekly
sessions
Weekly,
50 min
Original
25
2
Group intensive treatment
with residential
component
15
1
30 hr of therapy
weekly
Daily, all
day
Became group residential
35
3
Group residential
treatment with revised
exclusion criteria
10
1
30 hr of therapy
weekly
Daily, all
day
Excluded persons with
extensive histories of
psychedelic drug use
50
4
Group residential
treatment with revised
exclusion criteria and
increased intensity
10
1
60 hr of therapy
weekly
Daily, all
day
Increased to 2 weeks and
excluded persons with
extensive histories of
psychedelic drug use
60
5
Group residential
treatment with revised
exclusion criteria,
repeated ketamine Tx
and increased intensity
15
2
90 hr of therapy
weekly
Daily, all
day
Increased to 3 weeks, added
second ketamine session
and excluded persons
with extensive histories
of psychedelic drug use
70
Note.
KEP = ketamine enhanced psychotherapy.


was no better than treatment outcomes of other interventions he had practiced in
the past without including ketamine. Kolp attributed his initial failure to replicate
Krupitsky’s data to a significant difference in their respective programs, most nota-
bly the fact that Krupitsky treated all his clients in a highly structured residential
setting utilizing group psychotherapy, whereas Kolp’s patients were treated with
individual psychotherapy in an unstructured outpatient setting.
Method 2: Intensive Week-Long Group Treatment
With Residential Component
Subsequently, Kolp modified his treatment approach to include KEP along with
group psychotherapeutic programming offered as part of a week-long intensive
residential rehabilitation program. Kolp started placing the patients in a structured
community housing and directed two separate week-long rehabilitation programs,
which were administered from Sunday (5:00 p.m.) through the following Saturday
(11:00 a.m.) and had the following schedule:
Day 1—Sunday
Arrival/Orientation
Day 2—Monday
Body Needs
Day 3—Tuesday
Mind Needs
Day 4—Wednesday
Soul Needs
Day 5—Thursday
Ketamine-Enhanced Psychotherapy
Day 6—Friday
Holotropic Breathwork
Day 7—Saturday
Grounding/Departure
The original residential program offered more than 30 hr of psychoeducational and
encounter groups, interactive classes and didactic lectures. A sample day was as
follows:
6:00 a.m.
Wake Up
6:00 a.m.–6:30 a.m.
Personal Purification Ritual
6:30 a.m.–7:30 a.m.
Yogic Stretching
7:30 a.m.–8:30a.m.
Breathing Exercise and Meditation
8:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
Breakfast
9:00 a.m.–10:00 a.m.
Interactive Psychoeducational Group
10:00 a.m.–12:00 p.m.
Growth-Oriented Encounter Group
12:00 p.m.–1:00 p.m.
Lunch
1:00 p.m.–2:00 p.m.
Interactive Psychoeducational Group
2:00 p.m.–4:00 p.m.
Growth-Oriented Encounter Group
4:00 p.m.–5:00 p.m.
Mindful Cooking Class
5:00 p.m.–6:00 p.m.
Dinner
6:00 p.m.–8:00 p.m.
Self-Support (“Wisdom Circle”) Group
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
409


8:00 p.m.–9:00 p.m.
Guided Imagery/Meditation
9:00 p.m.–10:00 p.m.
Journaling
10:00 p.m.
Bedtime
In total, KEP was administered to approximately 15 patients in a framework of in-
tensive week-long group treatment within a highly structured milieu of community
housing.
Results and discussion 2.
After restructuring the treatment settings and
utilizing group process, the success rate improved, although less dramatically than
Kolp had hoped, to an approximate 35% abstinence rate 1 year following comple-
tion of the treatment program. The results were still only about half of Krupitsky
and Grinenko’s (1992) reported success rate, so Kolp frequently consulted with
Krupitsky (E. Krupitsky, personal communications, 1997) about the poor results to
help identify the reasons for the considerable difference. Eventually, Kolp and
Krupitsky attributed the probable cause of this discrepancy to the fact that psyche-
delic substances were virtually unknown in the former Soviet Union and that the
vast majority of Krupitsky’s patients had never had a prior psychedelic experience
before their ketamine treatment. In contrast, a significant number of Kolp’s alco-
holic clients had a history of polysubstance abuse that included psychedelic drugs.
Kolp and Krupitsky speculated that the novelty of the psychedelic experience may
be essential to successful outcomes using ketamine. Kolp also corresponded with
another European scientist specializing in ketamine research, Dr. Karl Jansen (per-
sonal communication, February, 1997), who also agreed with this conclusion and
recommended that clients with a past history of abuse of psychedelic substances
not be admitted for KEP.
Method 3: Intensive 1 Week Group Treatment, Residential
Component, and Exclusion Criteria
Consequently, the exclusion criteria were reset and only those clients who had no
history of use of psychedelic substances were accepted into the KEP program.
Kolp quickly discovered that more than two thirds of his alcoholic patients had pre-
viously tried psychedelic drugs, though many had used psychedelics only occa-
sionally and in the remote past. As a result, the admitting policy was softened for
pragmatic reasons and again some clients with a history of use of psychedelic sub-
stances, such as those who had used them but only many years previously or who
had used psychedelic substances infrequently in a sacramental way, were still ac-
cepted. The modified residential program offered more than 30 hr of psycho-
educational and encounter groups, interactive classes, and didactic lectures. In
sum, KEP was administered to approximately 10 patients, who had no history of
410
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY


heavy use of psychedelic drugs, in a framework of intensive week-long group
treatment within a highly structured milieu of community housing.
Results and discussion 3.
The success rate using method 3 increased to
about 50%. However, it still did not match Krupitsky’s treatment outcomes. Kolp
then postulated that these results might be hampered due to the shorter duration of
his course of treatment as compared to Krupitsky’s approach in which patients
were treated on an inpatient basis for at least 1 month.
Method 4: Intensive 2-Week Group Treatment, Residential
Component, and Modified Exclusion Criteria
Kolp further modified his residential treatment program, lengthening its duration
to 2 weeks and increasing therapeutic time to more than 60 hr of psycho-
educational and encounter groups, interactive classes, and didactic lectures. Alto-
gether, KEP was administered to approximately 10 patients, who had no history of
heavy use of psychedelic drugs.
Results and discussion 4.
Kolp observed that, although the length of the
treatment program had doubled, treatment outcomes only increased to approxi-
mately 60% successful abstinence rate at the end of the 1st year. Despite this im-
provement, Kolp was still not satisfied with the aforementioned rate of success, be-
cause the results were still lower than Krupitsky’s.
Method 5: Intensive 3-Week Group Treatment
With Residential Component and Repeated Administration
of Ketamine
Kolp again consulted with Krupitsky (E. Krupitsky, personal communication,
October, 1998), and learned that Krupitsky started using ketamine sessions twice
during the course of treatment. Subsequently, during the later part of 1998, Kolp
started administering KEP two times during the residential treatment program,
which continued using community housing. In addition, he extended the length of
the rehabilitation treatment program from 2 weeks to 3 weeks (90 treatment
hours), increasing the amount of time devoted to existential and transpersonal
group psychotherapies, as well as life skills training (e.g., communication skills,
problem solving, relapse prevention, relationship skills, anger management, and
decision making), substance abuse education, training in optimal lifestyles related
to physical health (e.g., nutritional education, focusing on food purchase and prep-
aration decisions), and various nonverbal therapies (e.g., wilderness, art, and mu-
sic approaches to therapy) to provide the patients with alternative means of self-
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
411


expression and problem resolution, all within a general context of motivational en-
hancement efforts. Kolp used this method with approximately 15 patients.
Results and discussion 5.
With these additional changes, Kolp’s treatment
outcomes started approaching Krupitsky results, as approximately 70% of all
Kolp’s clients maintained stable abstinence for a year after completion of the treat-
ment program. In addition, nearly half of these clients who responded well to KEP
and recovered from their alcoholism also maintained remarkable abstinence from
their concurrent addictions, as well as showed good improvement in many coexist-
ing psychological disorders and psychosomatic illnesses. Regarding those who
failed to respond well to KEP using method 5, Kolp noted that approximately half
of these nonresponsive clients presented with a history of what he called severe
“control” issues and/or persistent difficulties in maintaining long-term interper-
sonal relationships.
TWO CASE STUDIES
To illustrate more deeply how KEP affected some clients, two representative case
studies are presented. At the pilot stage of data gathering, these case studies can be
very useful in both understanding how KEP might be effective in treating alcohol-
ism, especially through the transpersonal experiences that are reported, as well as
in guiding the future course of KEP.
Case Study 1
P.A. was a 47-year-old, bitterly divorced father of four children when he sought
KEP for his alcoholism. P.A. partook of alcohol for the first time at the age of 14,
started consuming it on a regular basis by the age of 16, and developed a pattern of
daily drinking by the age of 19. He began experiencing intermittent “black-outs” at
the age of 21 or 22 and started using alcohol as “an eye-opener” at the age of 36 or
37. His tolerance gradually increased and he eventually began consuming up to 1.5
cases of beer (36 12-oz. bottles) per day. P.A. admitted to driving after consuming
enough alcohol to be impaired and missing work because of a hangover on a regu-
lar basis. He also reported having verbal and physical fights with his former spouse
and remorsefully acknowledged neglecting the needs of his four children, which
ultimately led to the breakup of his marriage after 22 years.
P.A. resolved to seek treatment for his alcoholism at the age of 27, after he was
arrested for driving while intoxicated. P.A. was treated in four different treatment
programs at the ages of 27, 35, 38, and 42. His first treatment was a 28-day hospi-
tal-based program. The second one included a 1-week inpatient detoxification
with a follow-up in a halfway house for 3 months. The third time, he admitted him-
self to a residential rehabilitation program for 1 month, and the last time, he was
412
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY


treated in an outpatient program for 6 months. Treatment programs 1, 2, and 3 used
the 12-step principles of Alcoholics Anonymous, whereas treatment program 4
was based on a study of the Bible.
Unfortunately, despite his repeated antialcohol treatments, intermittent partici-
pation in AA meetings, and regular visits to a church study group, P.A. had invari-
ably failed to maintain sobriety. His longest remission was 10 months after his
third treatment, and his other three remissions were very limited. P.A. maintained
sobriety for only 2 months after his first treatment and for 6 months after his sec-
ond treatment (the remission time-span included his 3-month stay in the halfway
house). During his last treatment, he relapsed while still undergoing therapy, 1
month before his scheduled discharge. P.A. shared that he continued having “irre-
sistible cravings” for alcohol, which eventually led to his repeated relapses.
In addition to his alcoholism, P.A. developed nicotine and caffeine dependen-
cies. He started using tobacco at the age of 16 and, within a few months, started
smoking on a daily basis, consuming from 20 to 30 cigarettes per day. The habit
progressively escalated and, in his early 30s, he was smoking up to three packs of
cigarettes per day. P.A. began using caffeinated beverages at the age of 9 or 10 and
started consuming caffeine on a daily basis at the age of 15 or 16. His tolerance
gradually increased and, since his late 20s, he had been ingesting from 10 to 12
cups of coffee per day, in addition to one 2-liter bottle of Mountain Dew per day.
P.A.’s dependencies on nicotine and caffeine were not addressed at all during his
four previous treatments, nor did he ever make an attempt to stop using either sub-
stance on his own.
P.A. was initially detoxified from all three substances on an outpatient basis and
was admitted to our residential program for further treatment. He undertook the ac-
tual KEP procedure during the 2nd week of the program and described his
ketamine-induced transpersonal experience as follows:
First, my mind was pulled out of my body and was thrown into a void. Then, my mind
started dissolving into the void and soon nothing was left except my soul. I continued
alone, existing in an infinite but empty black space. I realized I had died and immedi-
ately my entire alcoholic life started flashing before me. I relived all the dismay of my
life as a drunkard and remorsefully witnessed waking up in my own puke, suffering
from repeated hangovers, continually hurting my body, stupidly destroying my pre-
cious mind. …
Even worse, I could also observe the consequences of my drunkenness on other
people and watched the ripple effects of persistently humiliating my family, repeti-
tively insulting my neighbors, making an ass of myself in public time after time. …
Deeply ashamed, I started begging God to forgive me and let me have the very last
chance to stop my self-destructive behavior. All of a sudden, I emerged from the void
into an infinite ocean of unconditional love. I was filled with bliss and became aware
that I am forgiven. I also realized that I was about to be re-born and took the oath to
live a healthy life from now on. …
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
413


On his discharge, P.A. reported that his cravings for alcohol, nicotine, and caf-
feine were completely gone. He also reported increased confidence in his ability to
maintain sobriety and felt positive he would never resume drinking and smoking.
His follow-up in 6 months confirmed his ongoing abstinence from all three sub-
stances. In addition, P.A. reported marked improvement in psychological and so-
cial functioning. On his 12-month follow-up, P.A. continued to maintain stable so-
briety and reported that he and his former wife had become involved in couple’s
reconciliation therapy.
Case Study 2
J.C. was a 39-year-old female, a social worker specializing in the treatment of in-
cest survivors. She requested KEP for treatment of her alcoholism. J.C. did not try
alcohol until the age of 28, when she started drinking infrequently, consuming one
or two alcoholic mixed drinks three or four times per year. She reported that her
drinking remained very mild until the age of 33, when she developed a binge pat-
tern of drinking. Not only did she begin consuming up to 10 mixed drinks per day
(her favorite drink became gin and tonic), but she also started drinking alcohol for
2 to 3 consecutive days. Her binge drinking rapidly escalated and, within 5 years,
the binge duration lengthened to 5 to 7 days, whereas her tolerance level reached
up to 2 liters of 80-proof distilled spirits per binge. Nevertheless, J.C. was able to
meet her work and family responsibilities, as she managed to binge only during her
vacations and limited her binges to four times a year. Her last binge, however,
lasted for 10 days and she had to miss work, which had never happened before and
prompted her to seek antialcohol treatment.
J.C. described a past history of “food addiction” since the age of 9, which she
developed shortly after her stepfather started sexually abusing her on a regular ba-
sis, two to four times a month, always while he was intoxicated. J.C. reported the
sexual abuse to her mother at the age of 10; however, her mother did not believe her
and the incest lasted for another 3 years. When she was 13, her stepfather was fi-
nally arrested for molesting another schoolgirl from their neighborhood. The man
was killed in jail within 1 week after his imprisonment, and J.C. never had a chance
to confront her abuser.
J.C. reported that she developed daily food binges by the age of 10, when she
began eating abnormally large quantities of food during a short period of time. Her
foods of choice became milk fats (cheese, butter), sweets (sugar, candies), and
white flour (breads, pastas), either separately or in combination (i.e., cakes, ice
cream, cookies). At the same time, she felt a loss of control over her eating. She did
not purge afterward by vomiting, excessive exercising, or using diuretics or laxa-
tives, but she reported eating more rapidly than usual, even when not physically
hungry, until she was uncomfortably full. In addition, after J.C. entered puberty,
she started having recurrent feelings of guilt after episodes of overeating and began
eating alone out of embarrassment at the quantity of food she was eating.
414
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY


J.C. was referred for individual psychotherapy at the age of 13 to address the is-
sue of sexual abuse. She continued weekly counseling for 2 years and monthly
counseling for another 3 years. In addition, she started participating in an incest
survivors’ group at the age of 15 and remained part of the group for 3 years. De-
spite her ongoing counseling, J.C. continued her daily food binges and was eventu-
ally diagnosed with compulsive overeating at the age of 18. At that time, she was
admitted for 2 months to a residential program specializing in eating disorders.
During her residential treatment, she learned always to measure the size of her reg-
ular daily meals and to avoid consuming “trigger fare” (all varieties of sweets,
white flour products, and caffeinated beverages). J.C. was also introduced to Over-
eaters Anonymous (OA) fellowship and started participating in the OA meetings
on a regular basis, from 2 to 5 times a week.
J.C. had only partial response to the intensive residential treatment. Although
she stopped binging on sweets and white flour products, she continued having food
binges on milk fats and also started binging on processed animal protein (salami,
ham, pastrami, and so on). At the age of 25, J.C. admitted herself for 6 months to
another long-term program in a halfway house, where she was diagnosed with
binge eating disorder and major depression. While in the program, she was treated
with a combination of cognitive-behavioral therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy,
and pharmacotherapy (Prozac). After her discharge from the halfway house, she
continued treatment with Prozac (80 mg daily) and regular participation in OA
meetings from two to three times a week. J.C. maintained stable remission from
food binges, yet she continued having strong cravings for “comfort” food (milk
fats and sweets) and suffered from recurrent depressive episodes.
During that time, J.C. discovered that alcohol could help her to stop feeling
badly about herself much better than Prozac did, and she started using alcohol to
help her cope with her craving for comfort food. In the beginning, she was using al-
cohol very cautiously, as she was afraid of becoming “a drunkard like my stepfa-
ther,” whom she continued hating passionately; nevertheless, within several years,
J.C. developed the aforementioned binge pattern of drinking. As the severity of her
binge alcoholism progressed, she also restarted binging on food at the age of 38.
Although she avoided trigger foods and milk fat, she restarted binging on pro-
cessed animal protein and, in addition, began binging on large amounts of salted
products (e.g., pickles, olives, etc.) during her alcohol binges.
J.C. was admitted to Kolp’s residential program within several weeks after her
last and longest binge on alcohol. She did not require detoxification and undertook
the KEP procedure during the 2nd week of the program. J.C. had the following
ketamine-induced transpersonal experience:
My body dissolved and I became a tiny bubble of living energy floating away into the
darkness of the land of the dead. I saw other energy bubbles around me and realized
they were the souls of dead people. I collided with another bubble that was very
gloomy and recognized my dead step-father. I started looking inside of his soul and
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
415


could observe his entire life. I saw him being terribly abused by his father and two un-
cles, who victimized him during his own childhood and adolescence.3 I could feel his
resentment and rage, his powerlessness and guilt, his loneliness and sorrow. I became
conscious how tormented his soul was and, for the first time, I was able to forgive him
abusing me.
I immediately felt that a big thorn was lifted from my heart and started feeling ra-
diant and liberated. Instantaneously, I moved from the darkness into the luminous
white light and became one with God. I felt profound peace and became filled with
unconditional love. This experience seemed to last an eternity and, for the first time
in many years, I became joyful and hopeful again. I knew I have a long and happy life
ahead of me.
On discharge, J.C. reported that her cravings for alcohol and comfort food were
entirely vanished. She felt optimistic and uplifted, filled with positive energy and
renewed hope. On her 6-month follow-up, she reported her ongoing abstinence
from alcohol and food abuse. She also reported increased interest in spirituality
and a higher level of psychological functioning. On her 12-month follow-up, J.C.
continued to maintain stable sobriety and noted the complete absence of cravings
for both alcohol and comfort food. She also shared that for the first time in her life,
she started having interest in a romantic relationship and began dating a man she
met in her church.
CONCLUDING DISCUSSION
After five iterations in using different methods of KEP, Kolp was finally able to
clinically replicate Krupitsky et al.’s (1992) Russian findings with U.S. clients in
effectively treating alcoholism, as well as possibly also helping a variety of co-
occurring addictions, psychological disorders, and psychosomatic illnesses. To
achieve these outcomes, however, administering various adjunctive therapies in
addition to KEP was required, suggesting that ketamine alone was not sufficient as
a therapeutic agent in this context. However, ketamine used adjunctively within a
carefully crafted set and setting did seem to show promise for treating alcoholism
in the United States. We speculate that ketamine can open certain types of impor-
tant doors to recovery but, without additional experiences, these doors will not be
entered or, perhaps, will only be revolving doors providing temporary, but not
long-lasting, transformations. Of course, with pilot data that is informally gathered
with no use of control groups or blinds (e.g., placebos), nothing definitive can be
416
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY
3J.C. shared that she learned that her dead stepfather was sexually and physically abused by his fa-
ther from official court records, but that her intellectual knowledge of the stepfather’s history of abuse
did not help her resolve her problems, whereas she attributed her significant improvement to the
transpersonal experience that was facilitated by KEP.


concluded about the effectiveness of KEP from this data. In addition, any possible
conclusions are further compromised because these data were presented and ana-
lyzed in a retrospective manner without the benefit of written records to substanti-
ate them. Nevertheless, based on the solid research on ketamine’s usefulness in
psychotherapy conducted in Russia and elsewhere, it is interesting to speculate
that Krupitsky’s approach may be culturally transferable to the United States. In
addition, the representative case studies strongly suggest that a transpersonal ex-
planation for KEP’s possible efficacy might be warranted. It is again noted that
most of the cutting edge research using ketamine psychedelic psychotherapy that
was performed in Russia by Krupitsky over many years utilized such a trans-
personal perspective in its application.
To explore the possible usefulness of KEP in the United States more fully, be-
yond what appears to be some initial clinical success by Kolp, it is crucial to repli-
cate these results in larger, well-controlled studies. We have designed the protocol
of a prospective single-site, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, paral-
lel group clinical trial of the efficacy of KEP as an enhancement to standard treat-
ment of alcohol dependence. Following patient selection and consent procedures,
it is planned that alcoholic clients will receive two sessions with ketamine or pla-
cebo on the 8th and 15th days of standard treatment in a 3-week residential pro-
gram with long-term outcomes measured every 6 months following discharge for 2
years. One unique aspect of our planned study is that we explicitly hypothesize that
transpersonal factors, such as changes in level of self-expansiveness (Friedman,
1983) and spirituality (MacDonald, 2000) are the essential active ingredients in
KEP and these will be carefully measured, along with other important factors. One
major limitation of our proposed study is that it will be impossible to actually blind
the participants as to whether or not they are receiving ketamine, due to its power-
ful effects that cannot be masked. A second major limitation will be the difficulty in
separating out the possible salutary effects of the various concurrent therapies
planned for augmenting the KEP. Many of these therapies could well be successful
enough in their own right, with or without ketamine, for treating alcoholism and both
the quantity and quality of these therapies seemed to be crucial in Kolp’s approach.
One interesting conundrum for future research and clinical applications of KEP
relates to the cultural differences between using ketamine in Russia as opposed to in
the United States, namely it appears that more alcohol clients in the United States
mightpresentwithahistoryofrecreationaluseofpsychedelics,includingketamine,
whichseemstopossiblydilutetheeffectivenessofKEP.Itisinterestingtospeculate
thatpriorpsychedelicusethathasoccurredinarecreationcontext,suchasingetting
“high” while riding roller coasters or engaging in social partying rather than in a sa-
cred—or at least therapeutic—context, may result in KEP somehow having dimin-
ishedtranspersonalpotency.Anotherconundrumisrelatedtoafindingthatalcohol-
ics may actually have less intense experiences with ketamine due to physiological
changes that occur from chronic alcoholism (see Krystal et al., 2003).
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
417


However, considering the tremendous price tag to many individuals in our so-
ciety, and to the society as a whole, of untreated alcoholism, we hope that a formal
research approach such as we are proposing will occur soon. We think the solid
evidence from Krupitsky’s pioneering studies in Russia on the effectiveness of
ketaminefortreatingalcoholismthere,aswellasthepreliminarybutcautiouslyopti-
mistic observations from Kolp’s work in the United States that are informally re-
ported here, strongly warrants such formal research proceeding. The major impedi-
ments to conducting this research include obtaining an institutional review board
willing to approve the off-label use of ketamine in a formal research context and the
need for receiving financial support from clinical grant-funding sources to do the
type of large-scale study that is required in this type of research. Although these im-
pediments may present significant barriers to conducting the type of scientific re-
searchintheUnitedStatesthatwouldberequiredformainstreamscientificcredibil-
ity to be received, the fact that ketamine can legally be prescribed off-label now, and
therefore can be presumed relatively safe, does circumvent many of the prejudicial
concerns against conducting research that affect most other psychedelics in the
UnitedStates.Furthermore,ketamine’slegalavailabilitytomedicalprofessionalsin
the United States now avoids the complex bureaucratic morass that is required in re-
searching other psychedelic substances in which simply obtaining stringently re-
stricted drugs for research purposes can take years to negotiate.
Also, with the new regulations in Russia barring research employing ketamine
psychotherapy, there is an urgent need to continue this important research tradition
elsewhere. Krupitsky is working hard to get permission to continue his studies in
Russiaandhopefullythisprohibitionthereisjustatemporaryimpedance.However,
the recent lifting of the ban on formal research on psychedelics in the United States,
whereanumberofimportantpsychedelicstudiesarenowoccurringinmajoruniver-
sities(Friedman,2006),hasledtoanexcitingopportunityforexpandingtheimpres-
sive Russian ketamine studies into a new cultural context, the United States.
Finally, as Friedman (2006) speculated, the psychotherapeutic importance of
psychedelics may well lie in their ability to foster transpersonal experiences that
have salutary effects. If these experiences can be brought forth in a reliable way
through ketamine and other similar psychedelic drugs, the benefits that might in-
ure could well dramatically change the way that addictive problems and other psy-
chological conditions are treated, as well as have much broader and positive social
implications.
REFERENCES
Abramson, H. (1967). The use of LSD in psychotherapy and alcoholism. New York: Bobbs Merril.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th
ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
418
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY


Amodia, D., Cano, C., & Eliason, M. (2005). An integral approach to substance abuse. Journal of Psy-
choactive Drugs, 37(4), 363–371.
Berman, R., Cappiello, A., Anand, A., Oren, D., Heninger, G., Charney, D., et al. (2000). Antidepres-
sant effects of ketamine in depressed patients. Biological Psychiatry, 47(4), 351–354.
Carr, D., Goudas, L., Denman, W., Brookoff, D., Staats, P., Brennen, L., et al. (2004). Safety and effi-
cacy of intranasal ketamine for the treatment of breakthrough pain in patients with chronic pain: A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Pain, 108, 17–27.
Cho, H., D’Souza, D., Gueorgiuieva, R., Perry, E., Madonick, S., Karper, L., et al. (2005). Absence of
behavioral sensitization in healthy human subjects following repeated exposure to ketamine. Psy-
chopharmacology, 179(1), 136–143.
Cornwell, B., & Linders, A. (2002). The myth of “moral panic”: An alternative account of LSD prohibi-
tion. Deviant Behavior, 23, 307–330.
Ellis, D., Husain, H., Saetta, J., & Walker, T. (2004). Procedural sedation in paediatric minor proce-
dures: A prospective audit on ketamine use in the emergency department. Emergency Medicine Jour-
nal, 21, 286–289.
Fontana, A. (1974). Terapia atidpresiva con ketamine [Antidepressive therapy with ketamine]. Acta
psiquiat. psicol. Amer. lat. [Psychiatric and Psychological Proceedings of Latin America], 20, 32.
Frecska, E., White, K. D., & Luna, L. E. (2003). Effects of the Amazonian psychoactive beverage
ayahuasca on binocular rivalry: Interhemispheric switching or interhemispheric fusion? Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs, 35(3), 367 – 374.
Frecska, E., White, K. D., & Luna, L. E. (2004). Effects of ayahuasca on binocular rivalry with
dichoptic stimulus alternation. Psychopharmacology, 173, 79–87.
Friedman, H. (1983). The Self-Expansiveness Level Form: A conceptualization and measurement of a
transpersonal construct. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 15(1), 37–50.
Friedman, H. (2006). The renewal of psychedelic research: Implications for humanistic and trans-
personal psychology. The Humanistic Psychologist, 34, 39–58.
Green, S. M., & Krauss, B. (2004). Ketamine is a safe, effective, and appropriate technique for emer-
gency department paediatric procedural sedation. Emergency Medicine Journal, 21, 271–272.
Grinspoon, L. (1986). Can drugs be used to enhance the psychotherapeutic process? American Journal
of Psychotherapy, 40, 393–404.
Grinspoon, L., & Bakalar, J. (1979). Psychedelic drugs reconsidered. New York: Basic Books.
Grof, S. (1994). LSD Psychotherapy. Alameda, CA: Hunter House. (Original work published 1980)
Holcomb, H., Medoff, D., Cullen, T., & Taminga, C. (2005). Effects of noncompetitive NMDA receptor
blockade on anterior cingulate cerebral blood flow in volunteers with schizophrenia. Neuropsy-
chopharmacology, 30(12), 2275–2282.
Howes, M. C. (2004). Ketamine for paediatric sedation/analgesia in the emergency department. Emer-
gency Medicine Journal, 21, 275–280.
Jansen, K. (1997). The ketamine model of the near-death experience: A central role for the NMDA re-
ceptor. Journal of Near-Death Studies, 16, 5 – 27.
Jansen, K. (2001). Ketamine: Dreams and realities. Sarasota, FL: The Multidisciplinary Association
for Psychedelic Studies.
Karst, M., Wiese, B., Emrich, H., & Schneider, U. (2005). Effects of different subanesthetic doses of
(S)-ketamine on neuropsychology, psychopathology, and state of consciousness in man. Neuropsy-
chobiology, 51(4), 226–233.
Khorramzadeh, E., & Lofty, A. (1973). The use of ketamine in psychiatry. Psychosomatics, 14,
344–346.
Krupitsky, E., Burakov, A., Romanova, T., Dunaevsky, I., Strassman, R., & Grinenko, A. (2002).
Ketamine psychotherapy for heroin addiction: immediate effects and two year follow-up. Journal of
Substance Abuse Treatment, 23(4), 273–283.
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
419


Krupitsky, E., Burakov, A., Romanova, T., Grinenko, N., Grinenko, A., Fletcher, J., et al. (2001). Atten-
uation of ketamine effects by nimodipine pretreatment in recovering ethanol dependent men:
Psychopharmacologic implications of the interaction of NMDA and L-type calcium channel antago-
nists. Neuropsychopharmacology, 25, 936–947.
Krupitsky, E., & Grinenko, A. (1997). Ketamine Psychedelic Therapy (KPT): A review of the results of
ten years of research. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 29(2), 165–183.
Krupitsky, E., Grinenko, A., Berkaliev, T., Paley, A., Petrov, V., Moshkov, K., et al. (1992). The combi-
nation of psychedelic and aversive approaches in alcoholism treatment. Alcoholism Treatment Quar-
terly, 9, 99–105.
Krystal, J., Karper, L., Seibyl, J., Freeman, G., Delaney, R., Bremner, J., et al. (1994). Subanesthetic ef-
fects of the noncompetitive NMDA antagonist, ketamine, in humans: Psychotomimetic, perceptual,
cognitive, and neuroendocrine responses. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 199–214.
Krystal, J., Petrakis, I., Krupitsky, E., Schütz, C., Trevisan, L., & D’Souza, D. (2003). NMDA receptor
antagonism and the ethanol intoxication signal: From alcoholism risk to pharmacotherapy. Annals of
the New York Academy of Science, 1003, 176–184.
Krystal, J., Petrakis, I., Limoncelli, D., Webb, E., Gueorgueva, R., D’Souza, D., et al. (2003). Altered
NMDA glutamate receptor antagonist response in recovering ethanol-dependent patients. Neuro-
psychopharmacology, 28(11), 2020–2028.
Lilly, J. (1988). The scientist: A metaphysical autobiography. Berkeley, CA: Ronin.
MacDonald, D. A. (2000). Spirituality: Description, measurement, and relation to the five-factor model
of personality. Journal of Personality, 68, 153–197.
Mayo Clinic. (n.d.). Prescription drugs: What does “off-label use” mean? Retrieved May 8, 2006,
from http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/prescription-drugs/AN01329.
McGlone, R. G., Howes, M. C., & Joshi, M. (2004). The Lancaster experience of 2.0 to 2.5 mg/kg intra-
muscular ketamine for paediatric sedation: 501 cases and analysis. Emergency Medicine Journal, 21,
290–295.
Miller, W., Brown, J., Simpson, T., Handmaker, N., Bien, T., Luckie, L., et al. (1995). What works?: A
methodological analysis of the alcohol treatment outcome literature. In R. Hester & W. Miller (Eds.),
Handbook of alcoholism treatment approaches (2nd ed., pp. 12–44). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Miron, J. (2004). Drug war crimes: The consequences of prohibition. Oakland, CA: Independent
Institute.
Morgan, C., Mofeez, A., Brandner, B., Bromley, L., & Curran, H. (2004). Ketamine impairs response
inhibition and is positively reinforcing in healthy volunteers: A dose-response study. Psycho-
pharmacology, 172(3), 298–308.
Morgan, C., Rossell, S., Pepper, F., Smart, J., Blackburn, J., Brandner, B., et al. (2006). Semantic prim-
ing after ketamine acutely in healthy volunteers and following chronic self-administration in sub-
stance users. Biological Psychiatry, 59(3), 265–272.
Nathan, P. N. (1986). Outcomes of treatment for alcoholism: Current data. Annals of Behavioral Medi-
cine, 1986, 8, 40–46.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2004). Alcoholism: Getting the facts. NIH publi-
cation number 96–4153. Washington, DC: U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Na-
tional Institutes of Health, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
Ostroff, R., Gonzales, M., Sanacora, G. (2005). Antidepressant effect of ketamine during ECT. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 162(7), 1385–1386.
Pahnke, W., Kurland, A., Unger, S., Savage, C., & Grof, S. (1970). The experimental use of psychedelic
(LSD) psychotherapy. Journal of American Medical Association, 212, 1856–1863.
Parwani, A., Weiler, M., Blaxton, T., Warfel, D., Hardin, M., Frey, K., et al. (2005). The effects of a
subanesthetic dose of ketamine on verbal memory in normal volunteers. Psychopharmacology,
183(3), 265–274.
420
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY


Ricuarte, G. (2005). Recognition and management of complications of new recreational drug use. Lan-
cet, 365(9477), 2137–2145.
Ring, K. (1984). Heading toward Omega. New York: William Morrow.
Robinson, E., Brower, K., & Kurtz, E. (2003). Life-changing experiences spirituality and religiousness
of persons entering treatment for alcohol problems. Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly, 21(4), 3–16.
Roquet, S. (1974). Operacion Mazateca: Estudio de hongos y otras plantas Allucinoganas Mexi-
canastratamiento psicotherapeutico de psicosintesis [The Mazateca Operation: Study of Mexican
mushrooms and other hallucinogenic plants used in psychotherapeutic psychosynthesis]. Mexico
City: Asociacion Albert Schweitzer.
Siegel, R. K. (1978). Phencyclidine and ketamine intoxification: A study of four populations of recre-
ational users. National Institute of Drug Abuse Research Monograph #21, Washington, DC: Na-
tional Institute of Drug Abuse.
Vollenweider, F. X. (1992–1993). New avenues in the search for biological correlates of altered states
of consciousness—From model to practice. Retrieved May 6, 2006 from http://www.maps.org/
news-letters/v03n4/03418pet.html
White, P., Way, W., & Trevor, A. (1982). Ketamine: Its pharmacology and therapeutic uses. Anesthesi-
ology, 56, 119–136.
Yensen, R., & Dryer, D. (1993/1994). The thirty years of psychedelic research: The Spring Grove ex-
periment and its sequels. Yearbook of the European College for the Study of Consciousness, 73–102.
AUTHOR NOTES
Harris Friedman received a PhD from Georgia State University in psychology. He
is Research Professor of Psychology at University of Florida and Professor Emeri-
tus at Saybrook Graduate School, as well as a licensed psychologist. He has writ-
ten over 50 articles and book chapters, focusing primarily on scientific approaches
to transpersonal psychology. He has also authored the Self-Expansiveness Level
Form, a widely used measure of transpersonal self-concept, and co-edits the Inter-
national Journal of Transpersonal Studies. He may be reached at harrisfriedman@
floraglades.org.
Eli M. Kolp received the M.D. degree from Moscow Medical Stomatological
Institute and received residency training in both psychiatry and surgery in Russia,
as well as additional residency training in psychiatry at the University of Texas
Medical School. In 1994, he began researching ketamine psychedelic psychother-
apy while on staff at the James A. Haley Veterans Hospital in Tampa, where he
continued his work through 1999. He also was a Fellow in Geriatric Psychiatry at
University of South Florida College of Medicine. He is Board Certified in Psychia-
try and presently maintains a private practice in the Tampa Bay area, specializ-
ing exclusively in ketamine psychedelic psychotherapy. He may be reached at
EliKolp@tampabay.rr.com.
Evgeny M. Krupitsky received the MD from Leningrad Institute of Hygiene
and Sanitation, the PhD from Leningrad Institute of Experimental Medicine
in Psychopharmacology, and the D.Med.Sci. in Psychiatry from St. Petersburg
KETAMINE ENHANCED PSYCHOTHERAPY
421


Bekhterev Research Psychoneurological Institute. He is the chief of the Labora-
tory of Clinical Pharmacology of Addictions at St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medi-
cal University and the chief of the Department of Addictions at the Bekhterev Re-
search Psychoneurological Institute, as well as the Main Specialist in Addiction
Medicine of the Health Care Committee of the Government of the Leningrad Re-
gion. In 1996–1997, he was Visiting Scientist in the Department of Psychiatry,
Yale University School of Medicine. He has more than 150 publications dealing
with the treatment of various forms of addictions and alcoholism. He may be
reached at kru@ek3506.spb.edu.
M. Scott Young received a PhD in experimental psychopathology from Univer-
sity of South Florida in 2004 and an MS in management information systems from
the same university in 2003. He works as Coordinator of Statistical Research in the
Department of Mental Health Law & Policy at the Florida Mental Health Institute,
University of South Florida. His research currently focuses on substance abuse
treatment program evaluation, coerced substance abuse treatment, and the long-
term effects of childhood sexual abuse on adult mental health. He has published a
number of articles and book chapters on substance abuse and mental health pro-
gram evaluation, and he has received grant funding to analyze substance abuse
treatment provider administrative data sets. He may be reached at syoung@
fmhi.usf.edu.
422
KOLP, FRIEDMAN, YOUNG, KRUPITSKY


