Six Years’ Experience

with LSD ‘Therapy

Fred W. Langner, M.D."

This paper consists of three parts, and samples two periods covering a
total of nearly six years’ experience with LSD therapy. The first period,
1954-57, will be summarized from a paper I wrote in 1957. This paper was
a means of taking inventory of the pros and cons for continued use of LSD
therapy. This evaluation of my own impressions led to an exciting con-
sideration, namely LSD as modus operandi for therapeutic self-examina-
tion in the non-psychotic.

PART ONE

My initial concern with LSD derived from the observation that the
discipline of analytically-oriented psychotherapy is prohibitive for many
patients because of its financial and temporal demands, and a shortage of
therapists. Yet there has been no other mode of therapy adequately ex-
periential to resolve conflicts and foster emotional growth. In the interest
of determining if lysergic acid reactions as reported by Sandison (1)
might offer a means of effectively telescoping analytic benefits into a
short-term experience, the potentialities of these reactions were explored.
During a period of more than two years (1954-57) sixty patients (repre-
senting most diagnostic labels but preponderantly schizophrenia and
severe personality disorders) were observed while under the influence of
lysergic acid during more than 600 episodes. For most of these patients, it
was the major therapeutic approach.

In this report a general evaluation of its effectiveness will be at-
tempted. It is accepted, a priori, that the evaluation is a non-controlled
study and to a considerable degree subjective. The initial cases had a poor
prognosis based on their chronicity and history of previous treatment
failure, The encouraging results with these caused me to enlarge and con-
tinue the study.

Lysergic acid was initially defined as a toxic agent which induces a
“model psychosis.” My objections to this concept will be presented later.
For the present my concept of the drug as a therapeutic agent is defined

* Director Langer Clinic, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

117


118 THE USE OF LSD IN PSYCHOTHERAPY AND ALCOHOLISM

as follows: Lysergic acid is an agent which diminishes effective compart-
mentalization within the mind, attenuates and often shatters the multiple
defensive adaptations which underlie neurotic behavior, permits in many
patients heavily repressed experiences to be brought rapidly into con-
sciousness and, in general, catalyzes the revocation and comprehension of
the traumatic roots of emotional illness. I have come to think of the drug
as a mental and emotional catalyst and an ego-enhancing agent. It is from
this standpoint that the drug is discussed in this paper.

Method of LSD Therapy

Each patient covered in this report of 1954-57 was handled, as re-
gards his LSD therapy, in essentially the same manner. Ninety to one
hundred and twenty minutes after a normal breakfast, the patient was
given an oral dose of LSD in a glass of water. Dosages varied from 0.4 to
3.0 cc (40 to 300 mcg). An attendant, functioning in an entirely permis-
sive manner and with duties chiefly as observer and stenographer, was
with the patient continuously. The doctor was in and out intermittently
but tried to be present whenever the assisting therapist thought the situa-
tion was noteworthy. A record of the patient’s verbalizations, behavior and
affect was kept in as full detail as possible. The duration of each LSD
episode averaged four to six hours. When it was deemed necessary (to
preserve the patient from too threatening disorganization), the reaction
was ameliorated or terminated with intravenous barbiturate or Frenquel,
or, rarely, both. Moderate oral sedation and Frenquel were used routinely
for a while to taper the reactions, but were found to be unnecessary as a
routine procedure. In some episodes, intravenous methedrine or methe-
drine-barbiturate were used to accelerate or modify existing responses.

Rate of Catharsis

Noteworthy is the appearance in some cases, during the first few
episodes, of the symbolic or literal expression of many of the dynamic
factors involved in the illness. These cases illustrate how the disinhibiting
aspect of the drug may permit a frontal attack on problems, even after
formal interviews had brought comparatively unrewarding results.

A patient who was treated unsuccessfully elsewhere with electro-
shock therapy for a severe neurotic depression was admitted to the sana-
torium after a recurrence of a suicidal attempt. He was uncommunicative
for the first week. During the second week, he was verbalizing moderately
freely, but during his fourth formal interview, he became resistant to the
conference procedure, protesting that the doctor’s concern with the past
was purposeless as it was the present he had to face when he went home.
This resistance followed the first admission of mutual masturbation as a
boy and his continued need for self-masturbation in his present marriage.
The next day he was bed-ridden, hysterically withdrawn, and hinting at
suicide. After ten days of highly regressive and negative behavior, he
reestablished contact and within the following week was able to reveal
current mutual masturbation with an older man and his feeling of irrita-


PSYCHOLYTIC THERAPY 119

tion with his marital heterosexual relationship. Thus, in over a month’s
relationship and hospitalization, little had been revealed verbally beyond
an expression of the present focal symptom of overt homosexuality.

At this point, LSD was introduced. The initial dose (100 meg, to
which 100 mcg were added after one hour) induced relatively little re-
sponse. Three days later, in response to 300 mcg, the following material
was freely verbalized.

1. Feelings of rejection by father, and its equivalence to castration.

2. Ambivalence toward the father, including overt death wishes,

3. Feelings toward oldest brother, similar to, but not as acute as,

those involving father.

4. Unsuccessful attempt to compete family-wise with youngest

sister.

5. Awareness of pathologic dependence on father and structuring of

this relationship as a scaffolding for projection.

During the next episode, two days later, the patient experienced
being incarcerated and crushed in the womb. He reacted as if the experi-
ence were intolerably painful, physically and emotionally. To alleviate
the distress without sacrificing alertness, a combination of barbiturate-
methamphetamine was given intravenously. Shortly thereafter the follow-
ing conversation was recorded:

Doctor: Why do you think you seemed to stop in your mother’s
womb?

Patient: My father. ... You (the doctor) take your children to the
beach, hikes, picnics and to things... .

Doctor: Are you out of the womb yet?

Patient: No, Siree.

Doctor: Why?

Patient: I don’t know, but I believe that people told me that I should
not have been born.

Doctor: What do you want most?

Patient: To be born physically; to be wanted; to be loved.

Doctor: What do you expect from your father and mother?
Patient: My father wouldn’t do the right thing by me. He shouldn’t
have showed my brothers all his love and attention.

Doctor: What does being born represent to you?

Patient: You mean at birth?

Doctor: Yes.

Patient: They wanted so much for me to be a baby girl at birth. And
I’ve tried so hard. I’ve washed dishes, cleaned the house.
I’ve been a girl so long that there’s been nothing left tc wish.

Doctor: Have you ever wished that you didn’t have the genital
organs of a male?

Patient: Yes—even to the point of cutting them off if it wasn’t for the
pain....

Following this, in the doctor’s absence, the patient demanded that the
doctor undertake to pull him out of the womb since he could not get out
by himself. Then he revealed that the feeling of being crushed was not
from the feeling of being delivered but was a feeling of being crushed by


120 THE USE OF LSD IN PSYCHOTHERAPY AND ALCOHOLISM

his father while still in the womb and that he hated him for having sex
relations with his mother while he was in there. Later in the episode, this
recollection from childhood occurred:

“Patient remembered that from the first time he ever heard a chicken
in the shell he couldn't resist the temptation to tear the shell open
and let the chicken out. He says that he was afraid that when the hen
sat on the eggs she would mash it to death before the baby chick
could get out of the shell by itself.”

Four days later, the patient experienced his fourth LSD episode. He
found himself back in the womb with his father’s penis painfully jabbing
his right eye—the same area referred to in his pre-LSD interviews as the
site of frequent, severe headaches when he fears he has lost friends. Dur-
ing this LSD episode, the patient spontaneously evolved his sexual de-
velopment in reference to his father as follows: watching his father urinate
stimulated the sex urge in him. This was before he started masturbating.
During puberty, he started having ejaculations and he wanted desperately
to talk to his father about his desire to have relations with him. If he had
mentioned this, his father would have beaten him brutally. Sexual rejec-
tion by father was now his conscious reason for hatred toward his father
and his mixed sexual feelings later in life. Following this, the patient ex-
perienced a severe pressure on his right eye and reported seeing his
father’s penis. In response to the doctor’s question, he stated that to keep
the pain from his eye he could have directed the penis into his mouth. He
doesn’t want that now, although he did then.

This portrayal of an umbilical union with both parents, with its re-
sulting psychosexual confusion might be readily delineated with psycho-
logical testing. It would be rare indeed that clinical interviews could
reveal such basic dynamics so readily except through the therapist’s intui-
tion. It is unlikely that such meanings could purposefully be revealed to
the patient so quickly. It is almost certain that the patient could not be
induced to experience them in so undeniable a manner in so short a period
of time.

In several cases, before and after the LSD episodes, interviews under
narcosis gave us an opportunity to compare degree and character of
cartharsis under these two influences. It was usually noted that the rate
of verbalization in these cases and the unloading of feelings near the
surface were greater and more rapid under narcosis, but the defense
mechanisms were not shattered as with LSD. Hence, while the ventilation
was usually found more continuous under sodium amytal-methedrine,
under the disinhibiting influence of LSD the cartharsis was more sig-
nificantly productive, more trauma-focused than under narcosis and the
relief to the patient more reconstructive in its effect.

Intensity of Abreaction

The abreactions may be literal or symbolic; they may borrow from
environment stimuli for a framework, they may transmute persons in the
reality environment into neurotically cathected figures out of the past.


PSYCHOLYTIC THERAPY 121

(One assisting therapist was strenuously choked during such a projective
acting out.) The abreactions may be repeated over a number of episodes,
each sustained for hours at a time, until the conflict so represented is
resolved. Several patients, following episodes in which a conflict was
abreactively experienced but not resolved, requested the drug the follow-
ing day in order to go back and pick up the stil] entangled threads that
wanted unraveling: “There’s something else that wants to come out”;
“something’s still smothering me, I’ve got to find out what it is”; “I almost
had an answer, but I wouldn’t let myself go deep enough. I don’t think [’ll
be afraid to let go this time.” The drug, to these patients, was a means of
“going back,” a means of reexperiencing and, by so doing, of understand-
ing present difficulties in terms of their past roots.

The abreactions were usually accompanied by a specific age aware-
ness, sometimes only a sense of orientation, sometimes involving a marked
alteration in body image as perceived physically by the patient.

One great benefit derived from this aspect of reaction to LSD was
the patient’s quick acceptance of the past as the source of his present
adjustment difficulties. It made the meaning of the present maladaptation
clear to the patient in terms of actual life experiences. It also gave a back-
ground of experience to the interpretations of the therapist and diminished
the resistances customarily met in this process.

Effect on Motivation and Insight

The effect on motivation and insight is one of the more dramatic
sequelae of LSD experience. This positive effect appears to result from
the experiential aspect of the LSD reaction. The patient promptly finds
that there are within himself feelings, meanings, memories, etc., of which
he had been unaware, which he would have denied had the doctor simply
told him they were there. In essence, he discovers his unconscious. One
patient who was started on analytic therapy at the conscious associative
level, ventilated, as if from under great pressure, intense resentment of
his father. After three weeks of examining some aspects of this problem,
he announced that he was more relaxed than he had been in years, and
was ready to go back to work. Because resistance to looking at his mother
was still insurmountable, LSD was recommended. The patient acquiesced,
more to please the therapist than for any other apparent reason. His first
episode under the drug took him literally and experientially back to his
mother’s grave at the time of her funeral. He grappled painfully with the
chronic feeling of being lost and abandoned which he had been fighting
since age 12 following his mother’s death. He spontaneously admitted the
following day that he had never believed the therapist’s hints that he
resented his mother for dying, but now that he experienced it, was willing
to go on with therapy. He requested more LSD, despite its painfulness,
because it permitted him to accomplish so much so rapidly.

Another patient, with a depressive anxiety reaction triggered by war
stress, ventilated freely, although under considerable pressure, at the con-
scious level. After his third conference, anxiety associated with his verbali-
zations increased his discomfort and he asked about taking a drug to “block


122 THE USE OF LSD IN PSYCHOTHERAPY AND ALCOHOLISM

out the past.” The wish to forget was related to his wife’s infidelity. Every-
body could be made happy, he maintained, by forgetting the past. After
eleven conference hours, during three week’s hospitalization, the patient
was sufficiently relieved of anxiety to consider himself ready for discharge.
His improvement adjustment was largely repressive in nature and he
could be encouraged to no insight into this development. Considerably
against his will he accepted LSD and stated:

“This is a shock. I thought I was well. I was going home tomor-
row. I wanted to prove to mother, daddy, Margie, Johnnie, and all
the others I wasn’t as sick as they all thought I was. Now I don’t know
what to think. There is nothing I haven’t told the doctor. I have all
my problems licked and J am at peace with the world—I thought I
had made so much progress and I am disappointed that Dr. Langner
does not think the same way I do. °

During the second episode, which was highly productive, the impact
of the revelations relating to parental resentments were so disruptive that
the patient was reluctant to take his planned weekend visit home. The
false confidence stemming from previously reinforced repression was de-
stroyed. He dreaded and desired the next experience under LSD. There
was no longer any need to reinforce denial as the major mode of adjust-
ment.

In the weeks devoted to LSD therapy, this patient experienced seven
episodes. During his last episode, as the pressure of release was diminish-
ing, he ventured that before LSD he had really thought he was well. Now,
he no longer knew what to think. Seeing, through LSD experiences, how
things “really were,” he felt as though he had been “acting his life in a
play.” In retrospect, nearly two years later, when he answered the LSD
questionnaire, he stated that LSD experiences “put me on my feet.”

Patterns of Response

The types of response were as varied as the personalities of the pa-
tients responding. This brought under scrutiny in 1957 the popular mis-
conception of the drug as a tool with which to induce a “model psychosis.”
LSD is a pharmacologically active substance, admittedly. However, this
activity, rather than inducing something, appears to release variable some-
things which are dependent on the individual’s life experience and person-
ality make-up. The only constant reaction noted in our hundreds of epi-
sodes was pupillary dilatation. In fact, this has been used to determine
effective drug dosage. Other physical manifestations of the drug’s presence
were variable, and related only to the emotional state, chiefly on the sense
of the defensive need to convert emotions to sensory and motor channels.

During our initial experiences with the drug, we were looking for
patterns of response, and, in general, found none. While individual re-
sponses during certain stages of therapy were moderately predictable, as
the therapy progressed, the patient’s responses suggested a variety of
rather different personalities—indeed, quite as different as the personality
changes within the patient during their various redevelopmenta} phases.


PSYCHOLYTIC THERAPY 123

For instance, one young woman initially felt intensely insecure, unworthy,
hostilely dominated and split within herself; she felt that she had no real
self. After a few episodes, this feeling of being split crystalized into a
sharply focused, dramatic experience—theree voices trisecting her real
life, her grandmother’s, mother’s and her own. Through the strength of her
transference, she finally disengaged herself from parental and grand-
parental dependence and domination and cultivated a feeling of oneness
—of Self—of being worthy and secure. The initial experiences had been
cold, threatening and disruptive; the later experiences had been warm
and reassuring. The changes in her Rorschach testing reflected a similar
development. This represents a typical change in the pattern of response
as the patient emerges from illness toward health.

PART TWO

Over 2,000 LSD sessions have been conducted under my supervision
during the last three years. As a result of this additional experience, some
new awareness and valuations have developed. Certain changes and
elaborations in technique have led to some interesting observations. These
comprise the subject of the rest of this paper.

First let us deal with the administration of the drug. I now prefer to
do this after a minimum of two hours’ fasting. With most patients I com-
bine the dose of LSD, which ranges from 50 to 300 mcg, with 1%-3
grains of nembutal and 10 to 20 mg of methedrine. The purpose of the
sedation is to diminish any anxiety that may create resistance. The methe-
drine maintains alertness and seems to provide a slight psychic push that
would otherwise be absent. Thus, without trauma to veins, a combined
narcosis-LSD effect is gained. In a number of patients this formula allowed
the continuation of drug sessions, since LSD used alone resulted in dis-
abling anxiety.

The average episode is still four to six hours. Before the patient is
left alone, “termination” medication is usually given. This now consists
of 100 mg Thorazine, or Mellaril, or 30-50 mg Librium which may need
to be repeated in one to two hours. Rare panic reactions have been termi-
nated by intramuscular Thorazine-barbiturate.

I would like to emphasize that patients are now both in- and out-
patients. Carefully selected patients are capable of leaving the hospital
after a treatment session eight to twelve hours after its inception. Patients
permitted out-patient use of the drug must be carefully chosen and pro-
vided for. The possibility of dangerous acting out, should the patient “go
back into the drug” after leaving the hospital must be excluded in advance.
Severely depressed or hostile patients are not a safe risk for this type of
management. Additional medication should be given immediately before
leaving the hospital for the night; for this I employ 100 mg of Thorazine
or Mellaril and carbital, grains 1%2. This permits the patient’s escort,
usually the spouse, to put the patient to bed immediately on arrival home.
Another condition necessary to out-patient use is the proper indoctrination
of the spouse or other responsible family member. A definite prohibition


124 THE USE OF LSD IN PSYCHOTHERAPY AND ALCOHOLISM

against permitting a patient to leave the hospital the same day is the lack
of someone to chauffeur him and the absence of someone at home to
supervise him during the night. Patients not meeting these conditions
must remain hospitalized overnight.

The influence of various attendants and therapists came under scru-
tiny, since normally we would feel this to be of major importance. Actually
this was not the case, Using the same attendant through a course of treat-
ment, or rotating several attendants, or using attendants of different sex
does not appear to have any decisive influence on the LSD situation, as
long as the attendant does not interfere.

One manipulation that has proved useful is to introduce a second
therapist with whom the patient has a prior therapy relationship, thus
accenting in the immediate setting a parental duality. Another simple
maneuver that may elicit feelings of value is to walk out on the patient who
needs the attendant’s presence as a shield for separation anxiety or as an
external superego. Another means of stimulation that has been tried is the
introduction of certain props at strategic times, such as a nursing bottle,
dolls, objects to throw and to hit. In selected instances we find that pa-
tients who need the permissiveness and reassurance of an attendant may
more quickly prepare themselves for acting out against the original object
by being encouraged to do so first with symbolic representations of these
objects, just as is done so often in the dream world. We do not focus these
feelings directly on the therapist because when the very hostile patient
acts out under LSD release, the symbolic target is in a position to get
hurt. I have had three fairly aggressive attendants who had a need to
promote interaction. Each one of these has been physically attacked.

During the past year, one innovation that has proved very rewarding
has been to extend a principle I have used in individual therapy to LSD
therapy. This is to have husband and wife involved together in the therapy
of either one of them. My technique here is to start the interview with
one spouse while the other listens. When the first spouse is ready to embark
on LSD (where this is indicated), the spouse who is still in a listening
status is allowed to sit in on the drug episodes, provided his or her ego
and love are adequate to tolerate the productions of the spouse in treat-
ment. When the original patient has received enough help to accept the
entrance into therapy of the listening spouse, the former may be allowed,
under adequate supervision, to act as “therapist” during the drug sessions
of the second spouse. This not only reduces the cost of therapy, a practical
consideration, but intensifies interrelatedness between them promoting a
level of communication that few marriages enjoy.

In an attempt to formulate the proper role and value of the attendant
during LSD episodes, the following conclusions were reached:

The patient who feels intense anxiety under LSD will need
some figure present who can offer adequate reassurance to avoid
panic and permit the process to continue productively. The patient
who is elaborating his feelings through somatizations can be helped
to convert them to feelings by timely interpretation. The patient who


PSYCHOLYTIC THERAPY 125

has come to a dead-end may occasionally be led into productive
channels through diversion into neutral territory followed by a mean-
ingful challenge. Many patients who are on the verge of acting out
may be baited into so doing. However, in all these situations, if the
support from the attendant has brought about reactions or produc-
tions that the patient is not ready to utilize, the episode may be fol-
lowed by some degree of retreat, as in any therapeutic situation where
feelings are provoked or reinforced before the patient is spontane-
ously ready for them. My over-all assessment is that the major purpose
of the attendant or therapist during an LSD episode is to provide
reassurance with a minimum of interference and with only occasional
interpretations or challenges.

For a period of time I was quite curious about the effect of the ex-
pectation of the therapist on the LSD productions. This was accentuated
by the reports of the Jungians who fostered the “transcendental experi-
ence.” However, in reviewing this phase of the problem, I perceived that
my patients had their share of transcendental experiences without my
having so labeled them. But these transcendental experiences were not a
zenith, except momentarily. The rapturous narcissistic self-afrmation that
evolved from these episodes might carry the individual through a couple
of days or a couple of months. In all instances, they fitted into the total
therapy as a jumping off place, a place at which the patient had divested
himself momentarily of the previously self-paralyzing negations and ex-
perienced a positive if regressive self-image from which further motivation
to grow was crystallized.

Any patient may at some time in his therapy feel obliged to please
the therapist or seek approval through pleasing. This is more difficult to
do under LSD than when not under its influence. Many times, based on
dream material or day-by-day reactions, one can point that the patient
is ready to look at this or that phase of his problem under LSD intensifica-
tion. The result is more variable than the conscious willingness or resist-
ance of the patient. Some patients have consciously wanted to pursue a
certain emotional channel but develop, during the episode, a phase of their
problem wholly unrelated and even more basic and traumatic. Because of
these observations, I feel that the expectation of the therapist influences
the LSD production less than the developments associated with other types
of therapeutic involvement.

As in all analytic therapies, patients under LSD have their defenses
and resistances. A list of these is enumerated as a matter of interest.
Dreamlike symbolization, especially hallucinations of foreign places—
frequently oriental—and underwater scenes and hallucinations of geomet-
ric patterns are among the commonest visual projections. Somatizations are
very common and eventually become receptive to interpretation. Vomiting
and bodily cold are among the most common somatizations. Physica] pain
may be symbolic and defensive, or a matter of literal memory. Panic or
disorganization are next in frequency. Euphoria without any productive-
ness is occasionally met. Narcissistic compensations of a dramatic and


126 THE USE OF LSD IN PSYCHOTHERAPY AND ALCOHOLISM

elaborate nature have been encountered and are difficult to work through,
especially in the schizophrenic. Sleep is very uncommon. Most of these
defenses can be worked through over a period of time.

In 1957, results with LSD led to the hope of facilitating psycho-
therapy through a specific pharmacological agent. This hope was based on
a concept fostered by LSD experiences, a concept I labeled “intra-
personal psychotherapy.” In susceptible individuals, LSD was seen to
bring the patient into contact with himself, breaking the barriers of time,
converting buried memories into immediate experiences with the full im-
pact of their meaning and influence on the frame of reference in which the
patient now lived. Without diminishing the importance of the transference
investment in the doctor, which permitted the patient’s becoming involved
with the therapy in the first place, it had to be admitted that much per-
ceiving of meaning and working through of the conflicts was now going on,
not in terms of a transference relationship, but in terms of the actual
primary life relationship. Certain patients, through abreactions, were now
able to relate their problems directly to the original interpersonal source
rather than through a transference. Instead of gradually identifying feel-
ings and their meanings in the transference relationship, certain patients
went directly to the original relationship while under LSD and spon-
taneously experienced cause and effect, need and deprivation, hurt and
anger, loneliness and fear, in their primal frame of reference and at the
physical and emotional age level when they originally occurred.

This happened so effectively in some cases that the presence of the
attendant or therapist was felt as a hindrance by these patients. They
preferred to be alone during the episode to perceive the causal relation-
ship without external hindrance. Others requested that the attendant be
with them, but refrain from making comments or asking questions, desir-
ing reassurance from the presence of another person, but no interfering
interaction.

PART THREE

January, 1965. It has been four and a-half years since my last in-
volvement with LSD as a therapeutic tool. The following opinions sum-
marize my retrospective impressions of its hazards and values.

One phase of judgment, which has been the focus of much of my
attention, is the degree of ego integration concomitant with abreactive
experience under LSD. I conclude that it is often considerable, at least
definitively more so than with hypnosis or narcosis in similar patients, With
many patients, conference sessions between LSD episodes were devoted
to the patients’ spontaneous exposition of the meaning, past and present,
of the most recent LSD episode. Such a sophisticated involvement was
limited to the neurotics and the less regressed character disorders. In such
patients the facilitating value of LSD still stands as a positive value in
retrospective judgment.

Is the “working through” time diminished for the patient, as a result?
We have no schedules or valid mass surveys to help us here. My personal


PSYCHOLYTIC THERAPY 127

impression, however, is that LSD experiences somewhat lessen the ex-
pected working through time in patients with moderately strong egos. One
reason may be that LSD provides the “crisis” which some patients need
for self confrontation. For others it may be the ego-enhancement which
fosters an on-going assimilation of material as it becomes conscious through
abreaction.

Another area of value is in certain psychotics. My observations sug-
gest that in a significant number an improvement in self-image and a
lessening of unconscious regressive fixations are readily demonstrable. I
am reminded of a manic-depressive alcoholic who had had manic episodes
every one to two years during the thirteen years prior to my contact with
him. He sweated and shook profusely through eight LSD episodes with
practically no verbalization and conscious insight. He could say only that
he felt relieved in an undefinable way after each episode. His follow-up
during a three year period revealed improved relating, negligible moodi-
ness and more stable performance than during his previous periods of
repeated hospitalizations.

A teen-age schizophrenic who was disorganized, unable to attend
school, suicidal and overwhelmed with guilt and unworthiness was another
nearly silent LSD patient. She would spit on the floor during her first
episodes, rub her face in her spittle and pantomine that this rejected
saliva was herself. Five years after her hospitalization she was reported as
successfully married and functioning creditably as a mother—with no
evidence of relapse during this period. These are examples of cases where
no post-hospita]l therapy was involved.

In general, it appears that the pseudo-neurotic and paranoid schizo-
phrenics do not respond favorably. From my over-all experience with
paranoid schizophrenics I feel that LSD has no value in this category and
may, in fact, be dangerous.

Schizoid personalities whose ego is not too brittle may be benefited
by the LSD experience insofar as it gradually gives some of them an ex-
perience with feeling. One schizoid summarized this to a group: “I know
now that I never knew what people were talking about when they talked
about feelings till I took LSD. I didn’t know till toward the end of my
second year of therapy that feelings could be good as well as bad.”

Schizo-affective reactions with a severe depressive component were
not dramatically effected by LSD in any of the several such patients ex-
posed. I feel that there may be a real hazard in using the drug in the
depressive psychotics due to both the overwhelming responses and the
excessive withdrawal which may occur.

How would I employ LSD if I were using it currently? I believe I
would welcome it to explore resistances in any patient with a good to
moderate ego. I would expect it to be highly useful for short term therapy
in acute neurotic decompensations or in character disorders where the
development of anxiety signals failing defenses. I would find it useful for
occasional strategic intrusion in the undifferentiated schizophrenic with
marginal functioning.

Do I feel any patients are being denied an experience of significant


128 THE USE OF LSD IN PSYCHOTHERAPY AND ALCOHOLISM

value as a result of non-acceptance of LSD as a therapeutic tool? Yes, I do.
This was reemphasized this past summer by a 21 year old lad who had
become disorganized the previous year, dropping out of college, working
thereafter in a beatnik restaurant until he felt so empty he became prac-
tically immobilized. He drifted home in a state of helplessness and dis-
trust, AWOL from Naval Reserve duty and threatening suicide if further
military service were enforced. He went to New York in search of some
undefined magic. While there he felt he was losing his mind. Black market
LSD was offered by a friend who told him it might help. This lad sum-
marized his one experience with LSD, when he saw me three months
later. He had experienced his infantile need of woman. He perceived
himself in terms of relationships past and present, acquiring some reality
dimension of self. For two weeks after this single episode he had a sense
of affirmation to his own being which was a new response within the limits
of his conscious memory. Thereafter the euphoric phase diminished but
just the memory of his experience that positive relatedness could be a
reality provided motivation for new goals and lessened his previously
devastating insecurity.

I cannot believe that such an instrument under proper supervision
can be other than a useful chemotherapeutic agent in psychiatry. My ex-
perience with the drug in certain areas is positive. Further validation of
its place in therapy is needed to promote any uniformity of opinion as to
its usefulness, but there is already considerable evidence to suggest that
the potential harm in the drug lies in its dramatic appeal to the sick
therapist. I have wondered, further, if its repudiation by many is a func-
tion of too limited experience and, in some instances, the therapist’s need
to contro] the rehabilitative process more closely than can be done
under LSD.
