Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Addiction Neuroscience 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/addicn 
Classic and non ‐classic psychedelics for substance use disorder: A review of 
their historic, past and current research 
Fúlvio Rieli Mendes a , ∗ , Cristiane dos Santos Costa a , Victor Distefano Wiltenburg a , 
Gabriela Morales-Lima a , João Ariel Bonar Fernandes b , Renato Filev b 
a Centro de Ciências Naturais e Humanas, Universidade Federal do ABC. Alameda da Universidade, s/n – São Bernardo do Campo, 09606-045, Brazil 
b Departamento de Psiquiatria e Psicologia Médica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo. Rua Major Maragliano, 241 - Vila Mariana, São Paulo 04017-030, Brazil 
a r t i c l e 
i n f o 
Keywords: 
Psychedelics 
Substance use disorder 
Drug addiction treatment 
Psilocybin 
Ketamine 
Alcoholism 
a b s t r a c t 
Substance use disorder (SUD) is a global public health concern that aﬀects millions of people worldwide. Con- 
sidering current research, addiction has been noted as the last stage of a chronic disease that may impair brain 
reward circuit responses and aﬀects personal and social life. Treatments for SUD face challenges including avail- 
ability and limited pharmacological response, often resulting in low retention of patients. A growing number of 
studies from the ‘psychedelic renaissance’ have highlighted the therapeutic potential of psychedelics for several 
psychiatric disorders, including SUD. In this non-systematic review we discuss past and current clinical and obser- 
vational studies with classic (LSD, DMT, psilocybin and mescaline) and non-classic (ibogaine, ketamine, MDMA, 
salvinorin A and THC) psychedelics for the treatment of SUD published until December 2021. Although results are 
still inconclusive for LSD, DMT, mescaline, MDMA and Salvinorin A, in general, the literature presents moderate 
evidence on the controlled use of psilocybin and ketamine for Alcohol Use Disorder, ketamine for management 
of opiate and alcohol withdrawal, and THC preparations for reducing withdrawal symptoms in Cannabis and 
possibly in Opioid Use Disorder. Importantly, studies suggest that psychedelics should be more eﬀective when 
employed as an adjunct therapy. Extensive research is warranted to further elucidate the role of psychedelics in 
the treatment of SUD. 
1. Introduction 
Harmful substance use represents a global public health concern that 
aﬀects millions of people around the world. Health-related issues caused 
by drug misuse are symptoms of substance use disorder (SUD), which 
may include: compulsive and risky consumption of a substance; unsuc- 
cessful attempts to control consumption; cravings; persistent use despite 
the awareness of its harmful eﬀects; impairment of social, professional, 
and recreational activities due to substance use; tolerance and with- 
drawal symptoms [1] . 
It is estimated that 36 million people suﬀered from SUD in 2019, 
with 500 thousand deaths attributed to drug use, including deaths due 
to liver cancer and cirrhosis, HIV infection and hepatitis C caused by 
unsafe injection practices, substance overdose and premature death [2] . 
Abbreviations: 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; Δ9 -THC, Δ9 -tetrahydrocannabinol; AA„ Alcoholics Anonymous; ASI, Addiction Severity Index; AUD, alcohol use dis- 
order; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; CBD, cannabidiol; CB, cannabinoid; CPP, conditioned place preference; CUD, cannabis use disorder; CREB, cAMP re- 
sponse element binding protein; DA, dopamine; DMT, N, N-dimethyltryptamine; ERK, extracellular signal regulated kinase; GDNF, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic 
factor; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MAO, monoamine oxidase; MDA, 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine; MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine; NAc, 
nucleus accumbens; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; OUD, Opioid Use Disorder; PFC, prefrontal cortex; RCT, Randomized Controlled Trial; RES, Randomized Experi- 
mental Study; SAU, smoking as usual; SUD, substance use disorders; THC, tetrahydrocannabinol; UDV, União do Vegetal ; VTA, ventral tegmental area. 
∗ Corresponding author: F.R. Mendes - Alameda da Universidade, s/n – São Bernardo do Campo, São Paulo, Brazil. 09606-045 
E-mail address: fulvio.mendes@ufabc.edu.br (F.R. Mendes) . 
Tobacco smoking was a leading factor for illness and death in 2015, 
causing over 7 million deaths [3] . It is estimated that 2.3 billion people 
aged 15 years and older worldwide are alcohol drinkers [4] . Mortality 
rates associated with harmful alcohol use are higher than those caused 
by diabetes, tuberculosis and HIV, with 3 million deaths in 2016 [4] . 
Addiction might be considered a chronic disease that may impair the 
brain’s reward circuit capacity to properly respond to reward and the 
modulation of stress and self-regulation [5] . Potentially addictive sub- 
stances increase dopamine (DA) release in the mesolimbic reward path- 
way either directly, acting within the system, or indirectly, by disrupt- 
ing the modulatory activity of other neurotransmitters [6] . These sub- 
stances stimulate dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area 
(VTA), which projects to nucleus accumbens (NAc), involved in appeti- 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addicn.2022.100025 
Received 9 February 2022; Received in revised form 15 June 2022; Accepted 21 June 2022 
2772-3925/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Fig. 1. The withdrawal phase. The signaling in basal forebrain areas (extended 
amygdala and habenula) is increased, triggering aversive symptoms. Non-drug 
related DA reward is decreased, causing anhedonia. These symptoms increase 
craving, which results in drug-seeking behaviors as a way to counteract the 
aversive state. 
Fig. 2. General circuits underlying craving. Drug-seeking behavior is triggered 
by drug cues. DA in the striatum is increased and the glutamatergic projections 
from the PFC, amygdala and hippocampus to the VTA and striatum modulate 
motivation to use the substance. DA - dopamine; PFC - prefrontal cortex; VTA - 
ventral tegmental area; Glu - glutamate. 
tive and aversive processes related to motivation [7] ; the amygdala and 
hippocampus, related to emotional memory; and the prefrontal cortex 
(PFC), which mediates self-regulation [5] . Repetitive DA stimulation in 
these areas acts as positive reinforcement for drug intake [8] and creates 
a conditioned association of consumption and reward [9] . In addition, 
chronic use attenuates the drug-induced DA release and reduces the ex- 
perience of reward [9] , which can result in tolerance and the need of 
higher doses to achieve the same level of satisfaction. 
Once substance eﬀects wear oﬀ, the withdrawal phase begins 
( Fig. 1 ), in which intense distress, anhedonia, anxiety, and other phys- 
ical symptoms may work as negative reinforcement and contribute to 
relapse, as the individual seeks the drug to avoid the unpleasant state 
[ 5 , 9 ]. Craving ( Fig. 2 ) may happen independently or be present during 
the withdrawal phase. During cravings, drug cues are processed below 
the threshold of conscious awareness by the neural systems that mediate 
drug memories [10] , triggering conditioned responses. The orbitofrontal 
and anterior cingulate cortex are the circuits responsible for salience 
and value attribution, and the conditioned responses are mediated by 
the hippocampus and amygdala [9] . The sensitivity to drug cues and 
aversive states are modulated by glutamatergic projections from these 
structures to the VTA and striatum, eliciting the motivation to use the 
substance [9] . 
Continued drug consumption may induce the prefrontal cortical 
circuits underlying executive functions to be hypofunctional, whereas 
withdrawal and low sensitivity to nondrug rewards cause the limbic 
circuits underlying conditioned responses and stress reactivity to be hy- 
perfunctional [9] . This combination aﬀects motivational systems and 
impairs decision-making processes, resulting in distress and great diﬃ- 
culty for quitting substance use despite the negative consequences and 
decreased pleasure due to tolerance [ 9 , 11 ]. 
Although drug use has increased and presents a global public health 
concern, the availability of treatment is still limited and only one in 
eight people with SUD had access to treatment in 2019 [2] . The eﬃ- 
cacy of treatments for SUD depends on a combination of medication 
and psychotherapy, given to complications related to mental health co- 
morbidities and the diﬃculty of individuals to adhere to treatment pro- 
grams [ 12 , 13 ]. The main pharmacological strategies in the treatment 
of SUD aims to reduce craving, decrease or prevent the positive rein- 
forcement caused by the drug, and minimize or abolish the unpleasant 
symptoms caused by withdrawal (including craving, anxiety, depres- 
sive mood and other symptoms typical to each drug). In some cases, 
replacement therapy is also a useful strategy for harm reduction. The 
currently available medications include antagonists, partial or full ag- 
onists of receptors, and drugs with diﬀerent pharmacological targets, 
such as enzymes that metabolize the substance consumed. Antagonists 
block receptors targeted by the substance and stop reinforcement of 
drug-aﬀected neural pathways; partial and full agonists can mimic some 
of the eﬀects produced by the drug and stabilize neural pathways that 
have been disrupted by harmful substance use [ 12 , 14 ]. Some examples 
of commonly used medications are: acamprosate and disulﬁram to treat 
Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD); methadone and buprenorphine to treat 
Opioid Use Disorder (OUD); nicotine replacement therapy, bupropion, 
and varenicline to treat Tobacco Use Disorder; and naltrexone, used 
for both AUD and OUD [ 12 , 14 ]. Non-pharmacological interventions are 
also used and can be associated with pharmacotherapy. Psychotherapy 
involves diﬀerent techniques that aim to modify behaviors that maintain 
substance use, such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapies [12] , and can be 
oﬀered as individual or group counseling, including mutual peer sup- 
port programs, such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) [12] . The severity 
of the problem dictates whether outpatient or inpatient care should be 
oﬀered [13] . 
Abuse and dependence of hallucinogen substances are still matter 
of debate. The use of natural drugs to alter the mind has been present 
in human history since remote times. There are reports of cannabis use 
and other hallucinogenic plants and mushrooms dated from thousands 
of years. Many of these substances were used as part of sacred ritu- 
als by Indigenous and traditional peoples [15–17] . In the last century, 
some synthetic hallucinogens were developed and became popular as 
recreational drugs, together with many natural hallucinogens. This class 
of substances can be described by many diﬀerent terms: hallucinogens, 
mind altering drugs, psychedelics, psychodysleptics, psychotomimetics, 
entheogens, and entactogens, among others [ 17 , 18 ]. Despite some dif- 
ferences in the meaning of these terms, they are widely employed in a 
generic way. In this review, we will adopt the term psychedelics, which 
can be divided into two main groups: classic and non-classic. 
Classic psychedelics are agonists or partial agonists of serotonin (5- 
hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) 2 A receptors, their primary pharmacologi- 
cal target in the brain, as well as 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 2C receptors [19] . 
Their aﬃnity to 5-HT receptors is related to their tryptamine moiety, 
which is the same scaﬀold in the chemical structure of serotonin [20] . 
2 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
The substances listed as classic psychedelics in this review are lyser- 
gic acid diethylamide (LSD), dimethyltryptamine (DMT), psilocybin and 
mescaline. The eﬀects exerted by these psychedelics include profound 
subjective alterations in mood, thought and perception, visual and au- 
ditory hallucinations, synesthesia, mystical-type experiences, derealiza- 
tion, depersonalization, ego dissolution, etc. [ 21 , 22 ]. 
Non-classic psychedelics are substances with varied pharmacological 
mechanisms. For instance, ketamine is a N-methyl- d -aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor antagonist; 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) 
acts as a 5-HT and DA reuptake inhibitor and releaser; ibogaine is an 
indole alkaloid with multiple targets; salvinorin A is a kappa -opioid re- 
ceptor agonist; and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) acts as a cannabinoid 
receptor partial agonist [23] . Although the classiﬁcation of cannabis 
as a psychedelic substance is controversial, THC clearly promotes al- 
terations on sensory perception and can induce mystical experiences, 
besides having important therapeutic properties [ 24 , 25 ]. Similarly to 
classic psychedelics, these substances can lead to altered states of con- 
sciousness with profound changes in somatic and aﬀective processes, 
perception and cognition [23] . However, they have diﬀerent primary 
mechanisms of action and their subjective eﬀects proﬁle is clearly dis- 
tinguishable from those produced by classic psychedelics [22] . There 
are other nature-based hallucinogens, such as atropine and scopolamine 
which act as cholinergic antagonists or muscimol and ibotenic acid, 
gabaergic and glutamatergic agonists respectively, but these substances 
will not be addressed in this review. 
The ﬁrst boom in psychedelic research occurred in the years 1950–
1970s. The Controlled Substances Act of 1970 classiﬁed psychedelics 
as Schedule I substances in the United States, considered dangerous 
due to their high potential for harmful use and no currently accepted 
medical use [20] . As a consequence, the National Institute of Mental 
Health stopped funding studies and the Drug Enforcement Agency hin- 
dered academics, leading to an abrupt interruption of research into the 
medical application of psychedelics [ 26 , 27 ]. During the same time, the 
International Psychotropic Convention of the United Nations of 1971 
was being developed and similar restrictions were extended worldwide 
[26] , which created political and cultural barriers against research in- 
volving psychedelics in many countries. 
Despite the prohibitory status of psychedelics, an increasing interest 
in the therapeutic use of these compounds has been observed. Recent 
studies have shown the therapeutic potential of psychedelics for several 
clinical conditions, including SUD [ 23 , 28–36 ], in agreement with inves- 
tigations conducted in the 1950s and 1960s. The therapeutic potential 
of psychedelics in the treatment of SUD is of interest, especially due to 
the involvement of other systems besides the dopaminergic system that 
might also suﬀer neuroadaptations that can lead to SUD, given their reg- 
ulatory role in reward and reinforcement [ 5 , 6 , 9 , 11 , 37 ]. For instance, in- 
creasing evidence suggests that the opioid system may be associated to 
processes like mood modulation, drug consumption and reward circuits 
related to drug and food intake [38] . The glutamatergic, GABAergic, and 
endocannabinoid systems constitute other important pathways modulat- 
ing aﬀective, hedonic, and aversive circuits in the brain [39–41] . There- 
fore, psychedelics might represent a step forward in the development of 
new treatments since they act upon diﬀerent neurotransmitter systems 
besides the dopaminergic system. 
Treatment using psychedelics is usually referred to as Psychedelic- 
assisted Therapy, which consists of individual or in group continuous 
psychotherapy with a single dose of the psychedelic during a dedi- 
cated session in which the patient is encouraged to focus on how to 
overcome their SUD. Some studies also evaluated the eﬀect of comple- 
mentary doses. There are usually one or more follow-ups to check the 
long-lasting eﬀects of the treatment, including interviews with family 
members about the patients’ substance use status. The approach for the 
Psychedelic-assisted Therapy as reported in this review varies, especially 
in the early studies as there was not a well-established methodology for 
this type of trial [42] . In this review, we are going to present past and 
current data of classic and non-classic psychedelics, discuss their possi- 
ble mechanisms of action, current state of evidence and limitations of 
their use in the management of SUD. 
2. Methodology 
We conducted a non-systematic review of clinical studies evaluat- 
ing the therapeutic use of classic and non-classic psychedelics for SUD 
published until December 2021. First, we searched at the databases 
PubMed and Web of Science for the following terms: “drug addiction 
OR drug abuse OR substance use OR substance use disorder OR depen- 
dence ” AND each of the following drugs: “LSD (OR lysergic acid diethy- 
lamide), DMT (OR dimethyltryptamine OR ayahuasca OR hoasca), psilo- 
cybin, mescaline, ibogaine (OR noribogaine), ketamine, MDMA (OR 
methylenedioxymethamphetamine), Salvinorin A (OR Salvia divinorum 
OR Salvia), and THC (OR tetrahydrocannabinol OR cannabis) ”. Depend- 
ing on the number of results, the search was limited selecting the ﬁlters 
to “clinical trial, randomized controlled trial, meta-analysis and system- 
atic review ” to remove non-human studies. The titles and abstracts were 
then screened to select the studies directly related to the topic of this 
review. The criteria of inclusion were papers written in English and 
with the full text available by the publisher or when it could be ac- 
cessed by repositories or other sources. The exception was the search 
with ayahuasca that also included papers in Portuguese and Spanish 
because there are important studies in South American countries with 
this DMT-containing preparation. After reading the papers (original re- 
search and reviews), relevant citations were searched on the internet 
and included in this review, when their full content was available. This 
strategy was adopted because many past publications were not found in 
the PubMed/Web of Science search. The criteria of exclusion were pa- 
pers written in languages diﬀerent from those cited above, duplicated 
studies (only the original or the complete study was included) and when 
the full article could not be obtained. 
2.1. Classiﬁcation of studies 
For each drug, clinical studies were classiﬁed according to the type of 
study and SUD evaluated. We attempted to classify the clinical studies as 
Randomized controlled trials (RCT), Randomized experimental studies 
(RES), Prospective pilot studies, Open label studies, Observational (lon- 
gitudinal or cross-sectional) studies and Case reports, whenever possi- 
ble; otherwise, we used the terminology adopted by authors to describe 
their experimental design. The main terminology for the reviewed clin- 
ical studies is available in a glossary at Box 1 . We tried to get informa- 
tion regarding the experimental sample, presence or absence of control 
group, doses and posology used, and other aspects of the experimental 
design. When information was absent or inconclusive (dose, random- 
ization, if inpatient/outpatient, adjunct interventions, etc.) it was not 
included in the tables. It was not our objective to perform any statistical 
analysis to validate the therapeutic use of the cited psychedelics, but 
we tried to discuss some degree of evidence for each substance on SUD, 
some positive and negative aspects and current limitations. Although 
not included in the result tables, online surveys were also discussed at 
the end of this review, because this kind of study has increased in the last 
years, despite some methodological issues that prevents more in-depth 
conclusions. 
Preclinical studies were also screened, and the main studies were 
included in this review in order to bring additional evidence of the anti- 
addictive eﬀect of psychedelics and to discuss possible mechanisms of 
action. However, such experimental studies were not classiﬁed or in- 
cluded in the tables. 
3. Results and discussion 
Fig. 3 shows the number of studies found for each psychedelic until 
December 2021 combining the substance names and the terms related 
to SUD (described in Section 2 ). The number of publications that match 
3 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Fig. 3. Number of studies published up to 2021 for each psychedelic found in 
PubMed search combining the substance names and the terms “drug addiction 
OR drug abuse OR substance use OR substance use disorder OR dependence ”, 
as described in Section 2 . 
our search criteria was higher for cannabis/THC, followed by ketamine, 
MDMA, and LSD. However, since the word cannabis was included in the 
search for THC, the results brought many studies not directly related 
with this review (for instance, studies with other cannabinoids). Also, 
most studies evaluated the prevalence of use, mechanisms of action or 
other pharmacological and social aspects of the substances, which is out 
of the scope of our review. 
Only clinical, observational, and case reports studies that investi- 
gated the eﬀectiveness of psychedelics for SUD were classiﬁed. Follow- 
ing our search and screening strategies we selected 76 clinical studies 
evaluating the use of psychedelics for SUD. Most psychedelics were eval- 
uated for AUD. There were 10 RCT, 15 RES, 4 Prospective pilot studies, 
13 Open label studies, 7 Observational (longitudinal or cross-sectional) 
studies (except anonymous online surveys) and 5 Case reports. Many 
clinical studies (most from 1950 to 1970s) had no clear experimental 
design and in some cases the methodology used was poorly explained 
in the text, which made it diﬃcult to analyze these data. The follow- 
ing sessions bring more details about the studies performed with each 
psychedelic. 
3.1. Classic psychedelics 
3.1.1. LSD 
Lysergic acid diethylamide was ﬁrst synthesized in 1938 by Albert 
Hofmann as a potential circulatory and respiratory stimulant [43] . The 
commercialization of LSD by Sandoz laboratories under the trade name 
Delysid during the 1950s made it possible to use it in a variety of exper- 
iments [44] . In addition to its use in clinical research, LSD also became 
popular as a recreational drug during the 1960s as part of the counter- 
culture era, despite the negative impact on its reputation [27] . 
LSD is a mixed 5-HT 2 /5-HT 1 receptor partial agonist, with aﬃn- 
ity for various 5-HT receptors subfamilies - namely 5-HT 1A , 5-HT 1B , 5- 
HT 1D , 5-HT 1E , 5-HT 2A , 5-HT 2C , 5-HT 5A , 5-HT 6 and 5-HT 7 [45] - and 
also DA receptors D 1 and D 2 [ 46 , 47 ]. It is a potent drug that can pro- 
duce important alterations of consciousness at doses as low as 20 μg, 
with rapid absorption from the gut and primary metabolization by the 
liver [20] . 
The majority of studies investigating the role of LSD as a treatment 
for SUD focused on alcoholism. We were able to ﬁnd 20 publications 
( Table 1 ), from which two are RCT, 6 are open label studies and 12 are 
not classiﬁed, most of them being reports of projects and treatments con- 
ducted in private and public clinics or hospitals. We also found several 
cross-sectional studies based on online surveys. 
The history of LSD as a treatment for alcoholism goes back to 1953, 
when psychiatrists Humphry Osmond and Abram Hoﬀer introduced the 
drug to individuals with history of chronic alcohol use, testing the hy- 
pothesis that its capacity to help individuals achieve expanded levels of 
self-awareness could have therapeutic beneﬁts [48] . In a small pilot ex- 
periment, two patients received a single dose of 200 μg LSD; one patient 
stopped drinking immediately after the treatment and remained sober 
for 6 months, and the other quit drinking during the follow-up period 
[48] . 
Several clinical studies with LSD were then conducted on a substan- 
tial number of patients diagnosed with AUD. The ﬁrst studies took place 
in the late 1950s [ 49 , 50 ] and were followed by the development of a 
treatment program based on the principles of AA [51] . The program con- 
sisted of weekly group therapy and AA meetings, work group therapy, 
movies with discussions, individual psychotherapy and the administra- 
tion of a single dose of LSD [51] . Colin M. Smith [50] investigated the 
use of LSD and mescaline as adjuncts in the treatment of alcoholism in 24 
patients receiving group therapy. There was no control group, and the 
follow-up period was one year, on average. Three of the 17 patients who 
received LSD (200–400 μg) achieved abstinence or very small rates of 
alcohol consumption, four patients decreased their alcohol intake, and 
10 did not present signiﬁcant changes. Smith [50] suggested that the 
drugs could be useful adjuncts to psychotherapy, as part of the treatment 
program, and speculated that the enhanced self-awareness appeared to 
have inﬂuenced the patients’ behavior after the treatment. 
A follow-up report by Chwelos et al. [49] described the treatment 
of 16 patients with an implemented version of the original program ap- 
plied by Smith [50] . After an average follow-up of 6 months, 10 patients 
were abstinent, ﬁve reduced alcohol intake and one did not present sig- 
niﬁcant changes. Authors suggested that surrender and self-acceptance 
were easily achieved in the LSD experience and associated such states to 
its therapeutic value. An open-label study with 61 patients who received 
a single dose of 400 to 1500 μg of LSD showed that 30 of them were ab- 
stinent and 16 of them presented reduction in alcohol consumption after 
the treatment [52] . In 1959, the Psychiatric Department of Moose Jaw 
Union Hospital, Saskatchewan, began to test LSD treatment for AUD pa- 
tients [53] . O’Reilly & Reich [54] examined the eﬀects of 200 μg on 33 
participants of the program and reported that 17 of them beneﬁted from 
the treatment, showing that LSD elicited profound alterations in percep- 
tion that were therapeutically manageable. In a subsequent follow-up 
survey, O’Reilly & Funk [53] found that, from 68 patients treated be- 
tween 1959 and 1962, 38% remained abstinent during the two months 
that preceded follow-up, but they did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant change in ab- 
stinence between the two follow-up periods. 
A report of Psychedelic-assisted Therapy demonstrated the eﬀect of 
LSD in patients with several psychiatric diagnoses, including AUD and 
SUD [55] . There was no control group and the dosage was gradually 
increased in each session, from 50 μg up to 150 μg. Patients presented 
some improvement after treatment, but statistical validation was not 
possible due to insuﬃcient number of cases in the various subgroups. Be- 
sides that, the absence of a control or comparison group limits ﬁrm con- 
clusions. Therefore, subsequent studies were more careful with method- 
ological aspects of research and included comparison groups with no 
LSD. 
Sven E. Jensen reported the results of a pilot project for treating 
patients with alcohol addiction with group therapy and a single dose of 
200 μg of LSD during the last week of treatment, in comparison to group 
therapy or individual psychotherapy only [51] . Those treated with LSD 
were abstinent or showed signiﬁcant improvement at the follow-up in 
comparison to the other two groups. A diﬀerent report showed that 
63% of the subjects treated with the same dose of LSD remained sober 
after discharge, compared to 27% in the control group, which only 
received individual treatment [56] . Kurland et al. [57] described the 
data of 69 pilot patients after the incorporation of a psychedelic session 
with 450 μg of LSD. One-third of patients remained abstinent for up six 
months and the authors concluded that LSD was relatively safe within 
the context of the treatment and the beneﬁt in some cases seemed con- 
siderable. 
Contrasting with these previous positive results, other studies did 
not show substantial improvement in AUD after LSD use, compared to 
controls. Cheek et al. [58] investigated the eﬃcacy of two doses of LSD 
(100 μg followed by a second dose of 200 or 300 μg) plus group ther- 
apy versus a regular program. No statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence be- 
4 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 1 
Human studies with classic psychedelics for substance use disorder. 
LSD 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Main results 
Reference 
Alcohol 
Preliminary open label trial, 
N = 17, inpatient, 1-year 
follow-up. 
Psychotherapy supplemented by occupational and recreational 
therapy + LSD (200–400 μg, orally). 
Other patients received mescaline (0.5 mg/kg). 
Three individuals were completely abstinent, 4 reduced alcohol intake 
and 10 presented no change in drinking pattern. 
Smith, 1958 [50] 
Alcohol 
Follow-up report, N = 33 
(including 16 new patients and 
the sample of Smith, 1958), 
inpatient, 6–18-month follow-up. 
Same protocol of Smith [50] (psychotherapy + LSD 200–400 μg orally), 
but with addition of auditory stimuli, visual stimuli, emotional stimuli 
and a change in the attitude of the people in contact with the patient. 
From the new sample ( N = 16), 10 were completely abstinent, 5 
reduced alcohol intake and 1 presented no change in drinking pattern. 
Chwelos et al., 1959 [49] 
Alcohol 
Open label trial, N = 61, 
inpatient, 18-month follow-up. 
Psychotherapy + LSD (400 to 1500 μg, orally). 
30 completely abstinent, 16 reduced alcohol intake, and 15 presented 
no change in drinking pattern. 
McLean, 1961 [52] 
Alcohol 
Open label trial, N = 33, 88-week 
follow-up. 
Psychotherapy + LSD 200 μg + additional 100 μg (if necessary). 
7 completely abstinent, 10 reduced alcohol intake, 10 presented no 
change in drinking pattern and 6 were lost to follow-up. 
O’Reilly & Reich, 1962 
[54] 
Alcohol 
Report of pilot project for 
treating alcoholics, N = 138, 2 
months (on average), inpatient, 
18-month follow-up. 
Group psychotherapy + LSD 200 μg compared to group psychotherapy 
without LSD and individual psychotherapy (control). 
Half the patients of both groups not treated with LSD were lost to 
follow-up. 
Statistical analysis showed that patients in the LSD group were 
signiﬁcantly more abstinent or improved at the time of follow-up 
compared to the other groups. 
Jensen, 1962 [51] 
Alcohol 
Report of project for treating 
alcoholics, N = 115, 2 months, 
inpatient, 18-month follow-up. 
Group therapy + LSD 200 μg compared to individual treatment by 
other psychiatrists (control). 
Almost half the patients in the control group were lost to follow-up. 
Signiﬁcantly more patients in the LSD group were abstinent or 
improved at the time of follow-up compared to those from the control 
group. 
Jensen & Ramsay, 1963 
[56] 
Alcohol 
Follow-up survey, N = 68, 
inpatient, 14-month follow-up. 
Program of milieu therapy + LSD 200 μg. 
38% abstinent in the two months preceding follow-up. 
No signiﬁcant change in abstinence or indulgence. 
O’Reilly & Funk, 1964 
[53] 
Alcohol 
Open label controlled trial, 
N = 64, 4 weeks, inpatient, 
12-month follow-up. 
Group therapy + LSD orally (ﬁrst dose of 100 μg and second dose of 
200 or 300 μg one week apart) compared to regular program without 
LSD (control). 
The LSD session happened in groups of 8, where 2 took the drug and 
the other 6 gave support. 
No statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between groups at any follow-up 
period. 
Marked advantage for the LSD group at 3-month were lost by 6-month 
follow-up. 
Cheek et al., 1966 [58] 
Alcohol 
Controlled study, N = 30, 
inpatient and day-care, 6-month 
follow-up. 
LSD (800 μg) or ephedrine sulfate (60 mg – placebo group) + group 
psychotherapy. A third group (control) received the same procedures 
and therapies, but no drug session. 
Didactic meetings or group psychotherapy every morning and 
afternoon. Other services available: physio- and occupational therapy 
facilities, individual casework and psychiatric interviews. 
The gain in abstinence time in the LSD, placebo and control groups was 
34%, 32% and 20%, respectively. 
No statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between treatment groups and no 
diﬀerential eﬀect of LSD. 
Smart et al., 1966 [61] 
Alcohol 
Report of an open-label study, 
N = 69, 3 weeks, inpatient, 
6-month follow-up. 
Psychotherapy + LSD 450 μg. 
All changes on the clinical scales showed statistically signiﬁcant 
beneﬁcial impact (except for hypomania). 
One third of the patients maintained abstinence up to the six-month 
follow-up. 
Kurland et al., 1967 [57] 
Alcohol 
Open label controlled trial, 
N = 99, inpatient, 18-month 
follow-up. 
- Pilot study: adjustable dose of LSD (enough to evoke a reaction). 
- Control: patients who had been in the same program prior to the 
addition of LSD. 
- Experimental: 1, 2 or 3 sessions of LSD (100 to 800 μg - average dose 
of 400 μg). 
No statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between groups and no noticeable 
diﬀerence related to the number of sessions. 
Van Dusen et al., 1967 
[59] 
Alcohol 
Randomized controlled trial, 
N = 72, inpatient, 6-month 
follow-up. 
LSD (600 μg, orally) or dextroamphetamine (60 mg, orally – control). 
No attempt at psychotherapy. 
Both groups improved considerably. 
LSD patients were signiﬁcantly better than the dextroamphetamine 
group at the 2-month follow-up, but no diﬀerences were observed at 
6-month follow-up. 
Overall, no diﬀerence between treatments. 
Hollister et al., 1969 
[62] 
( continued on next page ) 
5 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 1 ( continued ) 
LSD 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Main results 
Reference 
Alcohol 
Single-blind study, N = 95, 
inpatient/outpatient, 1-year 
follow-up. 
- LSD 1: 300 μg + adjustable dose 1 h later, intravenously. 
-LSD 2: 300 μg + adjustable dose 1 h later, intravenously + therapist 
present. 
- Comparison group: 3.75 g Sodium amobarbital + 30 mg of 
methamphetamine hydrocloride + adjustable dose 1 h later, 
intravenously + therapist present. 
- Control: Routine clinic care with therapy, without hospitalization. 
Split dosage technique: another injection 1 h later with a dose based on 
clinical assessment. 
All groups improved signiﬁcantly at 1-year follow-up, but there was no 
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between groups. 
Johnson, 1969 [63] 
Alcohol 
Controlled follow-up study, 
N = 176, 1 month, inpatient, 
12-month follow-up. 
Comparison of diﬀerent interventions: 
- Hypnodelic: milieu therapy + LSD 3 μg/kg 
orally + hypnosis + psychotherapy during drug session. 
- Psychedelic: milieu therapy + LSD 3 μg/kg orally + psychotherapy 
during drug session. 
- LSD alone: milieu therapy + LSD 3 μg/kg orally, without any other 
intervention. 
- Control: milieu therapy only. 
Half of the patients in each group received disulﬁram just prior to and 
after discharge, for the period of 1 year. 
Signiﬁcant improvement on most measures for all groups, but no 
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between groups. 
50–60% of patients had relapsed at 3-month follow-up. 
Disulﬁram made no diﬀerence in terms of treatment outcome. 
Ludwig et al., 1969 [66] 
Alcohol (and 
Neurosis) 
Open label controlled trial, 
N = 24, inpatient and outpatient, 
12-month follow-up. 
Repeated doses of LSD, ranging from 50 to 300 μg, orally, until the 
eﬀect was judged adequate. Control group had no intervention. 
Patients received a 5 mg tablet of dextroamphetamine before the drug 
session to reduce anxiety. 
The supposed therapeutic beneﬁts of LSD treatment could not be 
demonstrated by statistical analysis of the results. 
The analysis of the results was hampered because many patients did not 
complete the 6-month and 12-month follow-up. 
Denson & Sydiaha, 1970 
[60] 
Alcohol 
Follow-up study, N = 140, 2 
months, inpatient, 1-year 
follow-up. 
Experiment I: 
- LSD: 500 μg orally + human relations training. 
- Control: human relations training only. 
Experiment II: 
- LSD: 500 μg orally + human relations training. 
- Placebo: 25 μg orally + human relations training. 
- Control: human relations training only. 
The human relations training was based on exercises to enhance 
interpersonal problem-solving. 
Experiment I: no statistical diﬀerence between groups, although both 
showed good adjustment 1 year after treatment. 
Experiment II: ratings of good adjustment higher, but no diﬀerential 
eﬀect of treatments on outcome. 
Analysis of both experiments: no statistical diﬀerence between 
LSD + human relations training and human relations training alone. 
Bowen et al., 1970 [64] 
Alcohol 
Controlled study, N = 333 (113 
schizophrenics, 220 
nonschizophrenics), 90 days, 
12-month follow-up. 
LSD (500 μg) + regular program compared to regular program alone 
(control 1). A second control group had taken the regular program 
previously. The protocol of regular program was not described. 
The beneﬁts of all treatments disappeared in the course of a year. 
Nonschizophrenic LSD-treated patients had the highest abstinent 
percentages. 
Marked negative eﬀect of LSD upon schizophrenic patients regarding 
post discharge drinking control. 
Nonschizophrenic patients who volunteered for LSD but did not receive 
it had the worst results. 
Tomsovic & Edwards, 
1970 [67] 
Alcohol 
Randomized controlled trial, 
N = 135, 6 to 7 weeks, 18-month 
follow-up. 
Psychotherapy + LSD high-dose (450 μg) or low-dose (50 μg – placebo 
group). 
The program oﬀered up to 3 sessions, but the majority of patients had 
only 1 session. 
Psychedelic psychotherapy successfully helped more than half of the 
alcoholics treated. 
Signiﬁcant small advantage of high-dose group at 6 months 
disappeared at 12 and 18 months. 
Kurland et al., 1971 [65] 
( continued on next page ) 
6 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 1 ( continued ) 
LSD 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Main results 
Reference 
Alcohol and 
narcotics 
Report of Psychedelic-Assisted 
Therapy, N = 17. 
Psychedelic-assisted Therapy with an average of 6.2 sessions per patient 
with an interval of 2 weeks on average. Gradual increase of LSD dosage: 
- 50 μg in the 1st session. 
- 25 μg more in the 2nd session. 
- 150 μg total by the 4th or 5th session. 
- Drop to 100 μg after patient has learned to work with the drug. 
The addicted patients presented some improvement in symptoms, 
productivity and anxiety. 
Chandler & Hartman, 
1960 [55] 
Heroin 
Controlled study, N = 74, 4 to 6 
weeks, inpatient and outpatient, 
12-month follow-up. 
Regular clinic program (control) or psychotherapy + LSD (300 to 
450 μg) + regular clinic program. Psychedelic therapy was inpatient, 
whereas the regular clinic program was outpatient and included group 
therapy. 
Regular clinic program was based upon the “abstinence approach, ”
with weekly group therapy + daily urine surveillance. 
The mean follow-up ratings showed no statistically signiﬁcant 
diﬀerences between groups. 
High correlation of abstinence with adjustment. 
Savage, 1973 [68] 
DMT / Ayahuasca 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention / survey methodology 
Results 
Reference 
Crack-Cocaine 
Cross-sectional observational 
study, N = 40 crack-cocaine users 
and former users. 
Qualitative semi-structured interviews using the DSM-IV criteria for 
dependence. 
Ayahuasca doses were not clearly reported. 
80% of participants ceased drug consumption after starting using 
ayahuasca. 
The others 20% reported having fallen back into crack/cocaine use 
after having attained abstinence with the help of ayahuasca. Among the 
reasons for relapse, detachment from the ayahuasca community stood 
out. 
Cruz & Nappo 2018 [90] 
Multiple 
substances 
Cross-sectional observational 
study, N = 84. 
Interviews with adolescents regarding the use of a variety of 
psychoactive substances, comparing ayahuasca users and non-users 
(controls). 
Ayahuasca doses were not clearly reported. 
Ayahuasca users were mostly comparable to control except for a 
considerably smaller consumption of alcohol in the past and at the time 
of the study. 
Religious aﬃliation may have played a central role as a possible 
protective factor for alcohol use. 
Doering-Silveira et al., 
2005 [84] 
Multiple 
substances 
Longitudinal observational study, 
N = 242, 12-month follow-up. 
Addiction severity was assessed using the Addiction Severity Index 
(ASI), and records of history of the alcohol and illicit drug use. 
Two subsamples: 
- Study 1: jungle-based sample; 
- Study 2: urban-based sample. 
Ayahuasca doses were not clearly reported. 
Ayahuasca users showed lower scores on the ASI - Alcohol Use and 
Psychiatric Status subscales. 
Jungle-based ayahuasca users showed a higher frequency of previous 
illicit drug use but ceased at the time of examination, except for 
cannabis. 
12-month follow-up showed abstinence from illicit drug use was 
maintained in both groups except for cannabis in the jungle-based 
sample. 
Diﬀerences on ASI scores were still signiﬁcant in the jungle-based group 
but not in the urban group. 
Fábregas et al., 2010 
[83] 
Multiple 
substances 
Longitudinal observational study, 
N = 12, inpatient, 6-month 
follow-up. 
Four days of group counselling combined with two expert-led 
ayahuasca ceremonies. 
Data was collected by several psychological and behavioral factors 
related to problematic substance use and qualitative information from 
their experience. 
Ayahuasca doses were not clearly reported. 
The treatment provided signiﬁcant improvements in scales assessing 
hopefulness, empowerment, mindfulness and quality of life meaning 
and outlook subscales. 
Self-reported alcohol, tobacco and cocaine use declined, although 
cannabis and opiate use did not. 
Reported reductions in problematic cocaine use were signiﬁcant. All 
study participants reported positive and lasting changes from 
participating in the retreats. 
Thomas et al., 2013 [85] 
Multiple 
substances 
Longitudinal observational study, 
N = 53, inpatient. 
Integrative program with sessions of detoxiﬁcation, diet and ayahuasca 
ritualistic sessions, together with sessions of psychotherapy. 
Data was collected by several scales, like, ASI and Craving Experience 
Questionnaire (CEQ). 
Ayahuasca doses were not clearly reported. 
A signiﬁcant decrease in addiction severity outcomes, drug use, alcohol 
use, psychiatric status, emotional distress and substance craving was 
observed. 
Quality of life increased signiﬁcantly from beginning to treatment 
completion. First indications for signiﬁcantly improved SUD symptoms 
after the Amazonian medicine-based treatment. 
Berlowitz, 2019 [92] 
(Continued on next page) 
7 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 1 (Continued) 
DMT / Ayahuasca 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention / survey methodology 
Results 
Reference 
Multiple 
substances 
Longitudinal observational study, 
N = 11, inpatient, 6-month 
follow-up. 
Four days of retreats with two expert-led ayahuasca ceremonies. 
Data obtained by semi-structured interviews 
Ayahuasca doses were not clearly reported. 
All participants reported reductions in substance use and craving; 8 
participants reported complete cessation of at least one substance at 
follow up. 
Increased connectedness with self, others and nature/spirit was 
described as a key element associated with reduced substance use and 
craving. 
Argento at al., 2019 [86] 
Multiple 
substances 
Longitudinal observational study, 
N = 36, inpatient, 2 to 12-month 
follow-up. 
Integrative program with Amazonian traditional treatments and 
Western psychotherapeutic methods. 
Data was collected by several scales, like ASI and CEQ. 
Ayahuasca doses were not clearly reported. 
Clinically positive changes were found across all repeated measures. 
The changes appeared early in the treatment and were maintained over 
time. 
Signiﬁcant improvements were also found for neuropsychological 
functioning. 
O’Shaughnessy et al., 
2021 [91] 
Psilocybin 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Results 
Reference 
Alcohol 
Open-label study, N = 10, within 
subject, no control group, 
12-week outpatient treatment; 
36-week follow-up. 
12-week course psychosocial treatment with psilocybin oral 
administration at week 4 (0.3 mg/kg) and week 8 (0.3 or 0.4 mg/kg). 
Adverse eﬀects were mild and transient. 
Percent drinking days and heavy drinking days decreased during weeks 
5–12 relative to baseline. 
Alcohol abstinence increased signiﬁcantly after psilocybin 
administration and was maintained at 36-week follow-up. 
Bogenschultz et al., 2015 
[112] 
(Qualitative analysis in 
Nielson et al., 2018 
[113] ) 
Alcohol 
Case report (Preliminary 
descriptive case study of an 
ongoing double-blind placebo 
controlled clinical trial). 
Protocol for psilocybin group was similar to that described in 
Bogenschultz et al. [112] , but with dose of 25 mg/70Kg (week 4) and 
30 or 40 mg/70 kg (week 8). Control group received diphenhydramine 
(50 mg, week 4; 100 mg, week 8; orally). The dose of week 8 could be 
kept the same of week 4 both for psilocybin and diphenhydramine, 
depending on the response on the ﬁrst session. An additional open-label 
session with psilocybin (25–40 mg/70 kg) was oﬀered to all 
participants who meet interim safety after the double-blind period (34 
weeks after randomization). 
Individual experiences and alterations in the selfperception, 
consciousness and in the relationship with alcohol and drinking were 
reported as possible reasons for alcohol abstinence by three patients 
from the ongoing study (the participants’ group remained blinded). 
Bogenschultz et al., 2018 
[114] 
Nicotine 
(tobacco) 
Open-label study, N = 15, no 
control group, 15-week 
outpatient treatment. 
4 weeks of cognitive-behavioral therapy, with the ﬁrst dose of 
psilocybin on week 5 (20 mg/70 kg), second dose on week 7 
(30 mg/70 kg) and an optional third dose on week 13 (30 mg/70 kg) 
during a structured 15-week smoking cessation treatment protocol. 
No clinically signiﬁcant adverse events. 
At 6-month follow up 80% of the volunteers showed seven-day point 
abstinence evaluated by self-report and biomarkers. 
Johnson et al., 2014 
[109] 
(Qualitative follow-up in 
Noorani et al., 2018 
[111] ) 
Nicotine 
(tobacco) 
Follow-up of the previous study 
(Johnson et al. [109] ). 
As described in Johnson et al. [109] . 
67% of participants were smoking abstinent at 1-year follow-up and 
60% remained abstinent on a long-term follow-up ( > 16 months). 
Johnson et al., 2017 
[110] 
Mescaline 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Results 
Reference 
alcohol 
Pilot study, N = 24, no control 
group, inpatient, 2-month to 
3-year follow-up. 
Single oral dose of mescaline (0.5 mg/kg, N = 7) as adjuncts to 
superﬁcial psychotherapy supplemented by occupational and 
recreational therapy. Other participants received LSD (200–400 ug, 
N = 17). 
From 7 participants treated with mescaline, two were classiﬁed as 
unchanged in alcohol intake, two improved and three much improved. 
Smith, 1958 [50] 
alcohol 
Case report of a member of the 
Native American Church. 
Not applicable. 
According to the case report, the individual stopped drinking alcohol 
after attending the peyote meeting. 
Albaugh et al., 1974 
[123] 
Heroin and 
dilauidid 
Case report, N = 3. 
Not applicable. 
Describes that individuals were able to quit drug use after the peyote 
ritual. 
Blum et al., 1977 [126] 
8 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
tween groups was found during 12 months of follow-up, although LSD 
patients showed advantage over controls at 3 months, but it was lost by 
6 months. Another trial by Dusen et al. [59] compared diﬀerent groups: 
one from the pilot phase in which subjects received an adjustable dose 
of LSD (ranging from 100 to 800 μg); three experimental groups who 
received 1, 2 or 3 sessions of LSD; and a control group who had been in 
the same program prior to the addition of LSD. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence 
among groups and no noticeable diﬀerence related with the number of 
sessions were observed. Denson & Sydiaha [60] conducted an open-label 
trial with people with AUD and other patients with psychiatric disorders 
who were treated with repeated doses from 50 to 300 μg. Results and 
discussion did not disclosure outcomes by their disorder, therefore it is 
not possible to know the exact outcome for the AUD patients. Addition- 
ally, because almost half the patients were lost to follow-up, possible 
beneﬁts of the LSD treatment could not be fully assessed. 
Some researchers also included a comparison group treated with a 
non-psychedelic substance besides a control group who did not receive 
any drugs. In a single-blind controlled study patients were divided in 
three groups, one that received 800 μg of LSD, one 60 mg of ephedrine 
sulfate, and one that received therapy but no drugs [61] . After a six- 
month follow-up abstinence time had increased among all groups with 
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between them, suggesting that LSD was no 
more eﬀective than other treatments. A RCT compared a single dose 
of 600 μg LSD with a single dose of 60 mg dextroamphetamine and 
a no-drug control group [62] . The results suggested considerable im- 
provement for both groups with an advantage for LSD patients at two- 
month follow-up but discontinued at six months. The authors stated that 
there was no substantial diﬀerence among treatments and LSD did not 
seem suitable as a primary treatment, although it might help patients 
through alleviation of guilt and “letting go ”. Johnson [63] compared 
the eﬀect of LSD (300 μg) with 3.75 g of sodium amobarbital (sodium 
amytal) plus 30 mg of methamphetamine hydrochloride (Methedrine) 
or routine clinic care (control group) in a single-blind trial. All groups 
improved signiﬁcantly at one-year follow-up, but there was no statis- 
tical diﬀerence among groups. The author concluded that LSD in this 
setting was no better than more conventional therapy and speculated 
that the improvement caused by both drugs might be due to some neu- 
rophysiological mechanism as a result from strong aﬀective discharge. 
It is important to note that it is notably diﬃcult to work with con- 
trol and placebo groups when testing psychedelics, given that such sub- 
stances have intense and distinguishable eﬀects. A strategy researchers 
adopted was to administrate a very small dose of LSD as “placebo ” (also 
called active placebo) - enough to elicit a reaction but not enough for 
participants to experience the intense eﬀects of the substance. A follow- 
up study by Bowen et al. [64] tested the eﬃcacy of LSD for AUD in 
two diﬀerent experiments. Experiment I was single-blind and compared 
participants that received 500 μg of LSD and a human relations train- 
ing program, with participants that only received the training program, 
whereas experiment II was double-blind and included a third group in 
which patients received active placebo (25 μg of LSD) and the training 
program. No diﬀerences were observed between groups. Kurland et al. 
[65] also compared an active placebo dose of 50 μg against 450 μg of 
LSD in which patients received up to 3 sessions of psychedelic therapy. 
There was immediate improvement in both groups, but no signiﬁcant 
diﬀerences between them. Researchers suggested that psychedelic psy- 
chotherapy was helpful to more than half of the treated participants, 
although a no-LSD control group prevented the diﬀerentiation of psy- 
chotherapy and LSD session. 
Other researchers tried a unique approach using a specialized ther- 
apeutic technique called “hypnodelic therapy ” combined with LSD 
(3 μg/kg). They tested four diﬀerent treatments: hypnosis + LSD + psy- 
chotherapy during the drug session; LSD + psychotherapy; LSD alone; 
and milieu therapy only (see details in Ludwig et al. [66] ). The results 
showed signiﬁcant improvement on most measures for all groups both 
at inpatient and follow-up evaluations, but no signiﬁcant diﬀerence be- 
tween groups. At the three-month follow-up 50–60% of patients had 
relapsed. Authors suggested that the LSD treatment did not produce 
any greater therapeutic beneﬁts in comparison with the other treat- 
ments tested. Tomsovic & Edwards [67] evaluated the eﬀect of a single 
overwhelming experience with 500 μg of LSD as a treatment for AUD 
in schizophrenic patients compared to controls who did not take the 
psychedelic. Despite some initial improvement, all groups showed loss 
of the progress made over a year and authors suggested that LSD had a 
negative eﬀect on schizophrenic participants with AUD regarding post 
discharge drinking control. 
We also found one paper investigating the eﬃcacy of LSD as a treat- 
ment to heroin addiction [68] . In this controlled study, patients received 
a single dose of 300 to 450 μg and therapy, and the control group 
received group therapy only. The mean follow-up ratings showed im- 
provement, but no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences between groups, 
suggesting that LSD therapy might contribute to the rehabilitation of 
heroin addicts, but it was not possible to attribute the positive eﬀects to 
the drug alone. 
Despite numerous studies investigating the beneﬁts of LSD for pa- 
tients with SUD, we only found a few recent studies evaluating the anti- 
addictive capacity of LSD in animal models. Alper et al. [69] evalu- 
ated the eﬀect of a single dose of LSD (25 or 50 μg/kg) on the self- 
administration of alcohol in C57BL/6 J mice using a two-bottle choice 
drinking paradigm. Ethanol consumption and preference decreased rela- 
tive to controls for 50 μg/kg LSD, with a group mean reduction of 17.9% 
in ethanol consumption, which was sustained across 46 days. However, 
total ﬂuid intake between control and LSD showed no statistically sig- 
niﬁcant diﬀerence. Authors concluded that the eﬃcacy of LSD involves 
psychological factors and biologically mediated eﬀects [69] . Another 
preclinical study investigated the eﬀects of 0.08 or 0.32 mg/kg LSD in 
Wistar rats using an alcohol deprivation eﬀect model with prophylac- 
tic treatment scheme, but the results showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence 
between the experimental groups [70] . 
It is important to note that we could not ﬁnd recent controlled tri- 
als investigating the therapeutic beneﬁts of LSD for SUD, probably due 
to the legal and bureaucratic limitations around psychedelic research. 
Nevertheless, even the clinical studies prior to the Controlled Substances 
Act were not able to achieve consensus in the scientiﬁc community. 
While some studies showed promising results [ 48 , 50–52 , 54 , 56 , 57 ], oth- 
ers were not able to conﬁrm the eﬃcacy of LSD nor show signiﬁcant 
diﬀerences between this psychedelic and other treatments [ 53 , 55 , 58–
68 ]. Moreover, it is not yet clear whether LSD is eﬀective as a treatment 
by itself or if it enhances the eﬃcacy of more conventional treatments 
when used as an adjunct. 
3.1.2. DMT 
N, N-dimethyltryptamine is an indole alkaloid widely found in na- 
ture, both in plants and endogenously in some animals [71] . DMT is a 
potent 5-HT 2A agonist, besides having aﬃnity for 5-HT 1A , 1B , 1D , 5-HT 2C 
and 5-HT 7 receptors [ 19 , 72–74 ], the latest involved in the modulation 
of synaptogenesis and neuritogenesis. Some studies have also observed 
an aﬃnity of DMT with sigma-1 receptors, which may relate to a possi- 
ble neuroprotective eﬀect [ 75 , 76 ]. DMT is orally inactive because it is 
metabolized by the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO), present in the 
liver and intestine, as well as in the human brain. Thus, the psychedelic 
eﬀect of this substance is observed only when it is ingested parenterally 
as a snuﬀor enema (although synthetic DMT can also be injected or 
smoked) [77] . 
Studies involving DMT are limited because the substance remains in 
the Schedule 1 of the Controlled Substances Act and due to the absence 
of eﬀects when it is used orally in its pure form. Although there is a lack 
of data about pure DMT as a therapeutic alternative, ayahuasca, a drink 
containing DMT, has been receiving increasing attention as a potential 
therapeutic tool and will be the focus of this session. 
Ayahuasca (from Quechua “Vine of Souls’’) is the common name 
used in the literature to characterize a psychedelic botanical drink 
used for rituals and therapeutic purposes by diﬀerent Amazonian tra- 
9 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
ditional peoples and modern syncretic doctrines [71] . The beverage 
(a brew) is commonly prepared by boiling the barks and stems of the 
vine Banisteriopsis caapi together with the leaves of the shrub Psycho- 
tria viridis , although other plants can be used [ 16 , 18 , 78 ]. The B. caapi 
vine has 𝛽-carboline alkaloids including harmine, tetrahydroharmine, 
and harmaline; while the leaves of P. viridis contain DMT [79] . The 𝛽- 
carbolines inhibits MAO type A in the gastrointestinal tract and CNS, 
causing a potent synergistic eﬀect, allowing DMT to access the circula- 
tory system and cross the blood-brain barrier inducing the psychoactive 
eﬀect. 
The therapeutic potential of ayahuasca, despite being historically 
observed by traditional communities, only appeared in scientiﬁc litera- 
ture in the past decades. Studies suggest that ayahuasca has therapeutic 
potential for anxiety disorders, depression and SUD [ 35 , 76 ]. Although 
there are some controlled clinical trials with ayahuasca for depression 
and anxiety, most studies related to SUD are observational, both quali- 
tative and quantitative ( Table 1 ). 
In an observational report, Grob et al. [73] evaluated a group of 15 
ayahuasca users in which 11 reported having a history of moderate to 
severe use of alcohol and other drugs before joining “União do Vegetal ”
(UDV), a Brazilian syncretic religion. According to this report, all users 
stopped using the drugs without reports of relapse, shortly after the start 
of recurrent use of ayahuasca. Employing ethnographic interviews and 
participant observation methods, Labigalini [80] qualitatively examined 
the subjective experience of four former alcohol users from Grob’s study 
and concluded that alcohol use was not replaced by ayahuasca, but in- 
stead, the individuals could expand their conscience and change their 
attitudes. Barbosa et al. [81] conducted a study with more than 1900 
members of UDV who had problems associated with alcohol and to- 
bacco. The authors showed that the success of the therapy among partic- 
ipants in ayahuasca rituals was superior to that found in other religions 
that work with people with SUD but did not have ayahuasca as part of 
the intervention. The study also showed that disorders related to alco- 
hol and tobacco consumption were signiﬁcantly lower in UDV members 
when compared to the average of the Brazilian population [81] . Perkins 
et al. [82] also observed that the use of ayahuasca in naturalistic set- 
tings seems to be related to lower self-reported current consumption of 
alcohol and other drugs for those with and without prior SUD. 
Another study assessed SUD symptoms and related problems among 
ayahuasca users utilizing the Addiction Severity Index (ASI) and inter- 
views [83] . In the ﬁrst part of this study, the authors compared a group 
of ayahuasca users living in forest areas to controls living in rural areas; 
then, they compared urban-based ayahuasca users to urban controls. 
The authors conducted the follow-up after one-year and in both samples 
ayahuasca users scored signiﬁcantly lower than their controls in the ASI 
and Psychiatric Status subscales, and these results were maintained in 
the follow-up tests [83] . 
A study conducted with adolescents belonging to UDV showed less 
use of alcohol and other drugs than young people of the same age 
who never used ayahuasca [84] . An observational study carried out in 
Canada evaluated the eﬀect of participating in two sessions of assisted 
therapy with ayahuasca in combination with four sessions in counseling 
groups on harmful substance use. The researchers reported decreased 
use of alcohol, tobacco, and cocaine by the participants, but not for 
marijuana and morphine [85] . There was also an improvement in the 
mood and quality of life scales, suggesting that the therapy produced 
positive psychological and behavioral changes on participants. A qual- 
itative study with 11 adults taking part in an ayahuasca retreat as a 
treatment for SUD showed that the intervention helped them to iden- 
tify patterns of negative thought and individual barriers related to their 
SUD. All participants reported decreased use and craving, along with 
72% of them ceasing at least one substance in a subsequent follow-up 
[86] . Mercante [87] conducted a study in three Brazilian communities 
that use ayahuasca for SUD. The researcher suggests that treatment with 
ayahuasca diﬀers from substitution therapy because context situations 
are addressed, such as social issues, and the treatment provides a social 
and personal transformation to the patients, decreasing their chances of 
relapse. 
Other qualitative and observational studies also suggest the thera- 
peutic potential of ayahuasca to treat diﬀerent types of SUDs [ 88 , 89 ], 
including crack/cocaine addiction [90] . The Center for Rehabilitation 
of Drug Addicts and Research on Traditional Medicines – Takiwasi – lo- 
calized into the Peruvian Amazon region, has played an important role 
in the evaluation of ayahuasca and other traditional medicines. An in- 
patient observational study conducted with 36 participants showed sig- 
niﬁcant and clinically positive changes in their perceived stress, craving 
frequency, mental illness symptoms, spiritual well-being, and physical 
and emotional health. These changes appeared early in the treatment 
and maintained over time [91] . Another study conducted at the Taki- 
wasi center assessed the eﬃcacy of a short-term therapeutic program in 
a sample of 53 individuals diagnosed with SUD (most presented poly- 
substance use of cannabis, alcohol, and cocaine-related drugs). After 
the ayahuasca session, participants showed signiﬁcant decrease in SUD 
symptoms and improvement of quality of life compared with baseline 
data [92] . The therapeutic potential of ayahuasca in SUD treatment was 
also assessed in a qualitative study conducted with health professionals 
and indigenous healers who use the beverage professionally in their in- 
terventions in the treatment of SUD. The study showed that, in carefully 
structured environments, ayahuasca may improve neurobiological and 
psychological processes that support the recovery from SUD and the 
prevention of relapses [93] . 
We did not ﬁnd controlled clinical trials evaluating the eﬀect of 
ayahuasca on SUD. On the other hand, some preclinical research seems 
to ratify the therapeutic potential of ayahuasca registered in observa- 
tional studies and help to better understand the mechanisms of how 
ayahuasca can assist SUD therapy. Oliveira-Lima et al. [94] investi- 
gated the acute and chronic eﬀect of ayahuasca (50–500 mg/kg) on 
behavioral sensitization induced by ethanol in mice submitted to the 
open ﬁeld apparatus. Their ﬁndings suggest that all tested doses of 
ayahuasca decreased the animals’ acute and sensitized behavior. An- 
other study using the same behavioral test showed that ayahuasca (cor- 
responding to 1.76 mg/kg of DMT) attenuated the ethanol-induced be- 
havioral sensitization in mice. In addition, researchers observed that 
ayahuasca reduced the anxiogenic response to ethanol withdrawal and 
prevented some ethanol-induced changes on 5-HT 1A density and pro- 
dynorphin levels in the hippocampus [95] . Cata-Preta et al. [96] investi- 
gated the potential of ayahuasca (30–300 mg/kg) and its isolated plants 
- B. caapi (132–1320 mg/kg orally) and P. viridis (3.75–37.5 mg/kg in- 
traperitoneally) in the experimental model of conditioned place prefer- 
ence (CPP) in mice. The research identiﬁed that only ayahuasca blocked 
the development of ethanol-induced CPP and not the plants per se . An- 
other study showed that ayahuasca (500 mg/kg orally) induced CPP per 
se , but its pre-treatment blocked the ethanol-induced CPP [97] . Nolli 
et al. [98] investigated the eﬀect of ayahuasca (171 - 686 mg/kg) on 
voluntary ethanol intake of rats followed by a subsequent analysis of c- 
Fos immunoreactivity in areas related to SUD. Ayahuasca didn’t change 
the voluntary ethanol intake in the animals tested, however, patterns of 
c-Fos immunoreactivity changed with the lowest dose of ayahuasca. 
Interaction of ayahuasca with other potentially addictive substances 
was also evaluated in preclinical studies. Godinho et al. [99] evaluated 
the eﬀect of ayahuasca (2 ml/kg) on voluntary amphetamine intake, in 
addition to protocols related to behavior associated with anxiety and 
locomotor activity in adolescent rats. Authors suggested that ayahuasca 
modiﬁes voluntary amphetamine consumption and prevents the eﬀects 
related to anxiety and locomotor activity. A recent study showed that 
ayahuasca (100 mg/kg) and methylphenidate induced CPP per se, and 
ayahuasca blocked methylphenidate-induced CPP reinstatement [100] . 
Additionally, methylphenidate induced diﬀerences in FOS immunore- 
activity in several brain regions, but ayahuasca had limited eﬀects. An- 
other study evaluated the ability of ayahuasca administration to prevent 
cocaine-induced behavioral sensitization [101] . Ayahuasca containing 
1.76 and 3 mg/kg of DMT did not reverse behavioral sensitization. How- 
10 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
ever, in a subsequent protocol, higher doses (15, 30 and 45 mg/kg of 
DMT) prevented the induction of behavioral sensitization by cocaine 
[101] . 
Preclinical and observational studies reporting the use of ayahuasca 
to treat SUD have encouraged the scientiﬁc community to perform more 
robust and controlled studies; however, it is important to emphasize that 
ayahuasca is a product prepared by the decoction of at least two plants 
with diﬀerent chemical compounds and it is not clear whether the phar- 
macological therapeutic is due to the synergistic action of the plants or 
if their active principles also have a role themselves. An observational 
study investigated the role of B. caapi vine alone (without the presence 
of DMT) in the therapeutic context of 390 patients at the Takiwasi cen- 
ter [102] . Results suggest that the vine also has therapeutic potential 
by itself possibly due to the psychoactive action of 𝛽-carbolines, which 
might contribute to patients beginning to be aware of the reasons be- 
hind the drug use behavior. This study is important to be mentioned 
as it supports that B. caapi may enhance the therapeutic properties of 
ayahuasca, and ratiﬁes the therapeutic and psychoactive eﬀects of MAO 
inhibitors per se . 
Along with the progress in psychedelic neurobiological science, data 
from ayahuasca studies indicate a promising aid in the treatment of de- 
pression, anxiety, and SUD. In this way, a group of researchers are con- 
ducting a study to create a method to evaluate and systematize research 
and treatment with ayahuasca. The Ayahuasca Treatment Outcome 
Project highlights the importance of treatment setting in the design, de- 
livery, and eﬃcacy of SUD rehabilitation programs with ayahuasca. The 
project employs qualitative research methods to determine the most im- 
portant aspects of the settings to patients, practitioners, and, primarily, 
how they correlate with some outcome measures [103] . Initiatives like 
this, added to results of current research, encourage further studies to 
better understand the therapeutic potentials of these substances. 
3.1.3. Psilocybin 
Psilocybin (4-phosphoryloxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine) is the main 
psychedelic compound found in Psilocybe mexicana and many other 
species of mushrooms known as magic mushrooms, sacred mushrooms 
and teonanacatl (Aztec name meaning god’s ﬂesh) due to their en- 
theogenic eﬀects. The ritualistic, religious and social use of magic mush- 
rooms by primitive American people (especially by the Mayans and 
Aztecs) has been well documented [18] . In addition to their spiritual 
and ritualistic uses, Psilocybe mushrooms have been used for healing 
purposes by primitive and Indigenous people and more recently by the 
general population both for recreational and medical purposes. 
Psilocybin is an indole alkaloid that after absorption is dephosphory- 
lated into its active metabolite psilocin, an indolamine whose structure 
is very similar to serotonin, what explains its eﬀects as a potent sero- 
tonergic agonist [104] . Psilocybin and psilocin are agonists of serotonin 
binding to diﬀerent subtypes of 5-HT receptors, mainly 5-HT 2A , with 
moderate eﬀect on 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 2C [ 23 , 105 , 106 ]. 
Most studies with psilocybin date back to the decades of 1950 to 
1970, but a substantial interest in this substance has emerged in the last 
10 years [ 23 , 105 ]. The literature suggests that psilocybin is relatively 
safe if used in moderate doses and controlled environments. According 
to a review published by Tyl š et al. [104] , psilocybin accentuates the 
pre-existing mood at very low doses, induces a well-controlled altered 
state of consciousness at moderate doses, while high doses may evoke 
strong psychedelic experiences. The substance remains in the Schedule 
1 of the Controlled Substances Act, classiﬁed as dangerous and without 
medical use by the United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Sub- 
stances [104] . On the other hand, recent studies have suggested the 
potential of psilocybin for several mental health conditions, including 
depressed mood, anxiety disorders (as well as anxiety and depression as- 
sociated with terminal / life-threatening diseases), obsessive-compulsive 
disorder, and SUD [ 34 , 105 , 107 ]. Clinical studies evaluating the use of 
psilocybin for SUD are shown on Table 1 . We found two open-label stud- 
ies and one case report describing preliminary results of an ongoing 
clinical study. 
The potential eﬀects of psilocybin to treat SUD have been recently 
evaluated for alcohol and tobacco [108] . Johnson et al. [109] con- 
ducted an open-label pilot study to determine the safety and feasibility 
of psilocybin as an adjunct to tobacco smoking cessation treatment. Fif- 
teen smokers attended four weekly meetings consisting of Cognitive Be- 
havioral Therapy for smoking cessation and preparation for psilocybin 
administration before the administration of the ﬁrst moderate dose of 
psilocybin (20 mg/70 kg). The meetings continued weekly, and the par- 
ticipants received another dose of psilocybin (30 mg/70 kg) at week 7, 
and an optionally extra dose at week 13. The authors reported that at the 
6-month follow-up 80% of the participants showed seven-day point ab- 
stinence evaluated by self-report and biomarkers [109] . A further evalu- 
ation showed that 60% of the volunteers remained abstinent at 2.5-year 
follow-up [110] . Participants of this study were invited to a retrospec- 
tive follow-up interview about 30 months after initial psilocybin sessions 
in order to identify perceived mechanisms of change leading to smok- 
ing cessation and key themes in participant experiences and long-term 
outcomes to better understand the therapeutic process [111] . Partic- 
ipants reported having vivid insights into self-identity and reasons for 
stop smoking from their psilocybin sessions and reported a range of per- 
sisting positive changes beyond smoking cessation, including increased 
altruism and pro-social behavior. 
Bogenschutz et al. [112] conducted an open-label proof of concept 
study to evaluate the use of psilocybin for AUD. Ten participants re- 
ceived a 12-week psychosocial intervention that included psilocybin 
administration at weeks 4 and 8. The psychosocial interventions con- 
sisted of 7 sessions of Motivational Enhancement Therapy, three prepa- 
ration sessions and two debrieﬁng sessions supporting the psilocybin 
sessions. Several questionnaires were used to measure mood, motiva- 
tion, craving, abstinence and scales of drinking behavior. Percent drink- 
ing days and heavy drinking days decreased after the psilocybin ad- 
ministration relative to baseline and weeks 1–4 (psychosocial treatment 
prior to psilocybin ﬁrst session). Abstinence increased signiﬁcantly fol- 
lowing psilocybin administration with data suggesting decreases in crav- 
ing and increases in abstinence self-eﬃcacy, and these improvements 
were maintained at the 36-week follow-up [112] . Key phenomena re- 
lated to change in drinking outcomes and acute subjective eﬀects of the 
psilocybin session are presented in a qualitative analysis of debrieﬁng 
sessions from this study [113] . A double-blind placebo-controlled clini- 
cal trial of psilocybin-assisted treatment for AUD is being conducted by 
the same group. So far, the authors have reported the qualitative descrip- 
tive case studies of three participants of this ongoing trial to illustrate 
the range of experiences and persisting eﬀects of psilocybin treatment 
[114] . Results of this clinical study is supposed to be published soon and 
will further contribute to the applications of psilocybin in the treatment 
of AUD. 
A preclinical study using Wistar rats evaluated three schemes of in- 
traperitoneal psilocybin treatment on alcohol relapse-drinking, employ- 
ing the long-term voluntary alcohol consumption with repeated depri- 
vation phases [70] . In the ﬁrst experiment rats received ﬁve injections 
of 1 mg/kg starting before the reintroduction of the alcohol bottles, fol- 
lowed by four applications in 12 h intervals; in the second experiment 
two high doses (2.5 or 10 mg/kg) were administered twice during the 
deprivation period; in the third experiment they evaluated the eﬀect of 
eight chronic intermittent microdosing administration (0.1 mg/kg) dur- 
ing abstinence on subsequent relapse-like drinking behavior. Psilocybin 
(1 mg/kg – ﬁrst schedule) acutely reduced the ethanol intake on the ﬁrst 
day post-abstinence (alcohol re-presentation) but had no long-lasting ef- 
fects on ethanol intake compared to the control group indicating no anti- 
relapse eﬀect [70] . The other two schemes of treatment had no eﬀect 
on ethanol intake after the abstinence time. These experiments did not 
reproduce the positive anti-alcohol eﬀect observed in human studies, 
but we should note that it cannot satisfy the criteria for a translational 
model as it is not possible to oﬀer psychosocial intervention on animal 
11 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
models. Furthermore, the study employed a diﬀerent route for psilocy- 
bin injection (intraperitoneal instead of oral). 
Some neurochemical mechanisms to explain the therapeutic eﬀects 
of psilocybin and other psychedelics have been proposed, while many 
researchers suggest that psilocybin induces experiences with personal 
meaning and spiritual signiﬁcance with sustained positive changes in at- 
titudes and behavior [115] . These experiences are persistent and strong 
enough to stimulate motivation to overcome the addiction. Recent stud- 
ies using magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomogra- 
phy have investigated the ability of psilocybin to modulate functional 
brain connectivity and suggest that psilocybin induces time-dependent 
changes with long-lasting eﬀects in cerebral functions [116–118] . How 
these changes can contribute to the therapeutic eﬀects of psilocybin 
should be considered in future research. 
3.1.4. Mescaline 
Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethoxyphenylethylamine) is a phenylethy- 
lamine found in the Peyote cactus ( Lophophora williamsii ) and other 
species of cacti. The peyote is also known as divine cactus, divine 
herb, ﬂesh of God, medicine of God, among other names and grows 
in desert regions of the southwestern United States and northern Mex- 
ico [119] . Other mescaline containing plants include Lophophora dif- 
fusa (false peyote, peyote querétano ) , Pelcyphora aselliformis ( peyotillo or 
little peyote) from Central America, Trichocereus pachanoi (San Pedro 
cactus¸ traditionally known as Wachuma ), and Trichocereus peruvianus 
(Peruvian Torch), which grow in Andean countries of South America 
[119] . Mescaline is an agonist of 5-HT 2 receptors, especially the 5-HT 2C 
subtype, but also acting on 5-HT 2A and 5-HT 2B subtypes with lesser po- 
tency [ 120 , 121 ]. Other secondary targets may be involved, including 
noradrenergic and dopaminergic systems (see Cassels & Sáez-Briones 
[120] for further details). The drug has low lipophilicity and crosses 
the blood–brain barrier with greater diﬃculty; therefore higher doses 
are needed to produce eﬀects similar to other psychedelics [ 121 , 122 ]. 
However, eﬀects last longer compared to psilocybin and LSD [119] . 
Peyote has been used by native peoples of Mexico for thousands of 
years due to its psychedelic properties. It is also used by several native 
American groups from the Native American Church, Pentecostal Chris- 
tianity and Traditional Navajo Healing groups in religious and healing 
ceremonies, as the ingestion of peyote facilitates communication with 
God or divine entities due to its power to make the individual transcend 
the boundaries of earth, space and time [119] . With the renaissance of 
the psychedelics, peyote and mescaline have become popular again as 
a psychedelic substance by non-indigenous and non-religious people. 
Members of the Native American Church report that mescaline is 
used to relieve symptoms of alcohol withdrawal and reduce relapse [36] . 
It is important to highlight that the use of peyote by native American 
people was generally conﬁned to the rituals, even for people under some 
kind of treatment. Recent studies have proposed the use of mescaline 
for the treatment of depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder 
and drug addiction [ 35 , 121 ]. However, we only were able to ﬁnd a few 
old reports supporting the use of mescaline for SUD ( Table 1 ). The use 
of mescaline to treat AUD is mainly based on reports which show that 
members of the Native American Church and other traditional groups 
use peyote in their ceremonies as part of the treatment of members with 
history of alcohol abuse [123–125] . It is described that peyote induces 
a state of self-understanding through ritualized introspection and self- 
examination that leads to a turning point, in which the individuals have 
visions of the potential alcohol problems and their life without drugs 
[ 124 , 126 ]. 
There are a few case reports about the use of peyote for SUD among 
traditional people. Albaugh & Anderson [123] brieﬂy reported a case of 
a member of the Native American Church that stopped drinking alcohol 
after attending the peyote meeting, but no additional details were pro- 
vided. Blum et al. [126] described three cases of SUDs (two of heroin 
and one with dilaudid, an opiod used to treat moderate to severe pain) 
in which the individuals could quit substance use after the peyote rit- 
ual, according to the authors. Despite the reported ritual use of peyote 
to treat AUD and other SUDs, there are no recent clinical trials or other 
scientiﬁc studies validating the use of mescaline for SUD without the re- 
ligious setting. Instead, many authors believe that mescaline is eﬀective 
only under the religious context, which is supported by anthropological 
studies [124] . 
We found only one clinical study evaluating the eﬀect of mescaline 
in AUD conducted as part of a psychedelic treatment for alcoholic pa- 
tients in the 1950s, but the methods and results were superﬁcially de- 
scribed. A group of particularly refractory alcoholics were selected to 
receive LSD or mescaline as adjuncts to treatment consisting of superﬁ- 
cial psychotherapy supplemented by occupational and recreational ther- 
apy [50] . Seven patients received a single dose of 0.5 g of mescaline 
orally and were evaluated on follow-ups conducted after two months to 
three years. Two patients showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences, two demon- 
strated substantial reduction in alcohol intake and three achieved com- 
plete abstinence. The author emphasized that this was a pilot study, and 
the use of mescaline or LSD was only part of the treatment program. A 
recent online survey evaluated the eﬀect of mescaline used in naturalis- 
tic setting on psychiatric conditions and SUD [127] . The majority of re- 
spondents with a prior psychiatric condition reported improvements in 
these conditions following mescaline (76% for AUD and 68% for SUD). 
We did not ﬁnd other studies that evaluated the use of mescaline for 
AUD or other SUDs. 
3.2. Non ‐classic psychedelics 
3.2.1. Ibogaine 
Ibogaine (10-metoxyibogamine) is the major indole alkaloid from 
Tabernanthe iboga , known for its psychoactive eﬀects and ﬁrst associ- 
ated with anti-fatigue, cardiac regulatory, aphrodisiac, and neurasthenic 
properties [ 16 , 128 ]. Ibogaine was ﬁrst isolated in 1900 by Édouard Lan- 
drin [129] , and in 1970 it was classiﬁed as an FDA Schedule I drug, 
which resulted in a lack of investigation until the 1990s, when ibo- 
gaine had its use approved for clinical trial protocols [130] . Concur- 
rently, Howard Lotsof reported improvements in withdrawal and crav- 
ing symptoms in a group of heroin users that received 6–19 mg/kg of 
ibogaine [ 130 , 131 ]. Despite therapeutic ﬁndings, ibogaine remains il- 
legal in the US mainly due to its side eﬀects, which include neurotox- 
icity and QT-interval prolongation during electrocardiogram monitor- 
ing [ 128 , 132 ]. Recently, the therapeutic eﬀects of ibogaine have been 
studied for the treatment of opioid, nicotine and alcohol use disorder, 
presenting promising results in both animal models and clinical studies 
[ 128 , 131 , 133 ]. However, we could only ﬁnd one randomized placebo- 
controlled pilot study and ﬁve reports or retrospective studies collecting 
data of patients who received ibogaine in detoxication clinics in an open 
label basis ( Table 2 ). 
Ibogaine has a polypharmacological proﬁle acting as a serotonin and 
dopamine reuptake inhibitor, 5-HT 2A agonist, NMDA non-competitive 
antagonist, nicotinic acetylcholine non-competitive antagonist and opi- 
oid agonist; presenting aﬃnity for kappa -, mu - and sigma 2 -opioid re- 
ceptors [ 128 , 130 ]. Its metabolization occurs primarily through CYP 2D6 
liver enzymes that convert this alkaloid into the active metabolite nori- 
bogaine (12-hydroxybogaine), associated with the long-lasting psycho- 
logical eﬀects usually related to ibogaine administration [ 128 , 132 ]. 
He et al. [134] proposed that the mechanism underlying the anti- 
addictive eﬀects of ibogaine involves the increase in glial cell line- 
derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in the VTA. Systemic administra- 
tion of ibogaine at a dose of 40 mg/kg reduced ethanol ingestion both 
in two-bottle preference test and operant conditioning chamber tests, 
demonstrating its potential in continuous access and auto administra- 
tion contexts, respectively. The same study also observed a long-lasting 
reduction of ethanol intake after intra-VTA injection of ibogaine [134] . 
These ﬁndings are consistent with another study in which ibogaine ad- 
ministration at a dose of 40 mg/kg increased the expression of brain- 
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and GDNF transcripts in dopamin- 
12 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 2 
Human studies with non-classic psychedelics for substance use disorder. 
Ibogaine 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Main results 
Reference 
Opioids - heroin 
Series of open label cases studies, N = 33, 
48–72 h duration, outpatient. 
Ibogaine 19.3 ± 6.9 mg/kg (6–29 mg/kg) 
76% of the subjects did not show withdrawal symptoms 
24–48 h after ibogaine’s administration and did not seek the 
drug for at least 72 h. 
Withdrawal symptoms relief has occurred fastly, in about 1–3 h 
after ibogaine’s administration. 
Alper et al., 
1999 [143] 
Heroin and 
methadone 
Report of the clinical experience of 
patients undergoing opiate detoxication, 
N = 32, inpatient, 12–14 days 
detoxiﬁcation program. 
Ibogaine HCl was administered at a dosage of 800 mg 
(approximately 10 mg/kg). Subjects also underwent 
motivational counseling and were forwarded to aftercare 
programs. 
A single dose of ibogaine reduced withdrawal symptoms for up 
to 36 h, according to The Objective Opiate Withdrawal Scale 
and Heroin Craving Questionnaire scales. Depressive symptoms 
also decreased, according to the Beck Depression Inventory. 
Mash et al., 
2001 [144] 
Alcohol, 
cannabis, 
cocaine, and 
crack 
Retrospective study of patients treated in 
a private clinic, N = 75, 7 days 
outpatient/inpatient. 
1–9 sessions of ibogaine (approximately 17 mg/kg) and 
cognitive behavioral therapy. 
After the last session, all women participants remained 
abstinent, while 51% of the men were abstinent and another 
15% were abstinent through other interventions. 
The abstinence lasted on average 5.5 months and 8.4 months 
after one session and multiple sessions, respectively. 
No serious adverse eﬀects were reported. 
Schenberg et al., 
2014 [147] 
Opioids (heroin 
and prescription 
opioids) 
Retrospective chart review of participants 
admitted to a single residential ibogaine 
treatment center, N = 50, 1-week 
inpatient. 
18–20 mg/kg ibogaine hydrochloride (oral administration). 
After a one-week ibogaine detoxiﬁcation protocol, the subjects 
showed a decrease in withdrawal and craving scores according 
to Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale, Subjective Opiate 
Withdrawal Scale and The Brief Self-Control Scale. 
Malcolm et al., 
2018 [145] 
Opioids and 
cocaine 
Open-label case series review, N = 191, 
12 days inpatient. 
8–12 mg/kg ibogaine HCl (oral administration) with 
motivational counseling and referral to aftercare programs. 
The detoxiﬁcation program with ibogaine reduced withdrawal 
symptoms, according to The Objective Opiate Withdrawal 
Scale. 
Ibogaine decreased craving scores assessed by Heroin and 
Cocaine Craving Questionnaires. 
Ibogaine was eﬀective in decreasing withdrawal-related 
depressive symptoms. 
Mash et al., 
2018 [146] 
Morphine 
Randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled prospective pilot study 
with noribogaine (ibogaine metabolite), 
N = 27. 
Subjects on methadone substitution therapy received morphine 
orally a week before the intervention of a single oral dose of 
noribogaine (60, 120 or 180 mg) or placebo. 
Noribogaine was well-tolerated despite ibogaine-like 
side-eﬀects. 
The time taken by the subjects to order replacement therapy 
didn’t diﬀer between the treated and placebo groups. 
Noribogaine showed a tendency in reducing withdrawal 
symptoms, although the results were not statistically 
signiﬁcant. 
Glue et al., 2016 
[148] 
Ketamine 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Main results 
Reference 
Alcohol 
Controlled, randomized, N = 186, 
outpatient, 1-year follow-up. 
Aversive therapy (Aﬀective Contra-attribution method) with 
intramuscular administration of ketamine (3 mg/kg), while the 
control group received traditional methods of aversive therapy. 
At the one year follow up, 69.9% of the group treated with 
ketamine was fully abstinent, compared to 24% of the control 
group. 
Krupitsky et al., 
1992 [167] 
Alcohol 
Controlled, N = 211, outpatient (data of 
100 control patients and 111 from 
ketamine group collected in a period of 
10 years of research). 
Patients underwent a 3-month treatment course of rational, 
cognitive individual and group psychotherapy with the aim to 
establish a mental set of sobriety and a negative attitude to 
alcohol. Then, ketamine group received intramuscular 
administration (2.5 mg/kg) and psychotherapy and met for 
group psychotherapy the day after the ketamine session. 
Abstinence of more than 1 year was observed in 65.8% of those 
who had undergone ketamine psychotherapy and 27.0% had 
relapsed, while only 24% of patients in the control group 
remained sober for more than 1y and 69% had relapsed. 
The rate of abstinence observed in ketamine group was 40.7% 
and 33.3% after 2 and 3 years, respectively, but the data was 
not collected from control group. 
Krupitsky & 
Grinenko, 1997 
[168] 
Alcohol 
Case reports of personal experience and 
data from about 70 patients treated with 
ketamine-enhanced psychotherapy in 
private practice. No controlled study. 
Five diﬀerent methods were employed. 
Ketamine doses were not clearly reported. 
The average abstinence rate after one year varied between 25 
and 70% according to the author, with the best result found for 
group residential treatment with repeated ketamine 
administration and increased intensity (using a revised 
exclusion criteria). 
Kolp et al., 2006 
[170] 
(Continued on next page) 
13 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 2 (Continued) 
Ketamine 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Main results 
Reference 
Alcohol 
Open-label study, N = 5, no control group, 
4-week treatment; 4-week follow-up. 
Combination of naltrexone (380 mg single dose) and ketamine 
(0.5 mg/kg intravenous infusion once a week for 4 weeks) in 
depressive patients with history of alcohol abuse. 
Depressive symptoms reduced after the treatment and 4 of 5 
patients reported improvement in alcohol craving and 
consumption. 
Yoon et al., 
2019 [171] 
Alcohol 
Randomized experimental study, single 
blind, N = 90, 9-monh follow-up. 
The primary goal was to evaluate the 
eﬀect of retrieval/destabilization of 
maladaptive alcohol memories on 
ketamine eﬀect over the alcohol abuse 
outcomes. 
Protocol consisted of three days: On day1 (baseline) and day 10 
(post-manipulation) primary outcomes and questionnaire-based 
variables were assessed. On day 3 participants were subjected 
to memory retrieval procedure and 5 min later received a 
30-min iv infusion of ketamine (350 ng/min) or placebo. A 
third group received ketamine without retrieval procedure. 
Ketamine disrupted maladaptive reward memories in 
hazardous drinkers when administered immediately after their 
retrieval. 
The group which received ketamine following maladaptive 
reward memories intervention showed reduced reinforcing 
eﬀects of alcohol and lower long-term drinking levels 
compared to the other groups (ketamine or retrieval alone). 
Das et al., 2019 
[176] 
Alcohol 
Randomized controlled trial (midazolam 
as control), N = 40, between-subjects, 
5-week outpatient. 
Motivational enhancement therapy, plus 52-minute 
intravenous administration of ketamine (0.71 mg/kg) or 
midazolam (0.025 mg/kg) at week 2. 
Infusions were well tolerated. 
Patients from ketamine group presented longer abstinence and 
time to relapse, and reduced heavy drinking days compared 
with midazolam on the 21 days of monitoring. 
No signiﬁcant diﬀerence was observed for craving, withdrawal 
and impulsivity. 
At the 6-month follow-up 75% of ketamine group self-reported 
abstinence. 
Dakwar et al., 
2020 [172] 
Cocaine 
Randomized experimental study 
(crossover, double-blind trial), N = 8, 
within-subjects, 9 days inpatient; 4-week 
follow-up. 
10-min mindfulness-based exercise before 52-min infusion of 
ketamine (0.41 or 0.71 mg/kg) and lorazepam (2 mg - active 
control) starting on day 4; infusions separated by 48 h. The 
smaller dose of ketamine always preceded the highest dose. 
Infusions were well tolerated. 
Ketamine signiﬁcantly increased motivation for changing 
cocaine use and decreased cue-induced cocaine craving 
(change scores relative to pre-infusion) compared to lorazepam. 
Dakwar et al., 
2014 [182] 
(Qualitative 
analysis in 
Dakwar et al., 
2014 [183] ) 
Cocaine 
Randomized experimental study, N = 20, 
6 days inpatient study repeated three 
times with each hospitalization separated 
by 2 weeks; 2-week follow-up. 
In each hospitalization, volunteers underwent the following 
protocol: washout period for two days; a session of free-base 
cocaine (25 mg) on day three; 52-minutes of saline infusion 
(ﬁrst hospitalization) and ketamine (0.71 mg/kg) or 
midazolam (0.025 mg/kg) intravenous. infusion (second and 
third hospitalization, in counterbalanced order) on day 4; a 
70-minute choice session on day 5; with discharge on day 6. 
It was observed 67% of reduction in cocaine 
self-administration from baseline as compared to the control. 
Ketamine induced signiﬁcant reductions in craving and cocaine 
use in the natural ecology relative to baseline, but the eﬀect 
only diﬀered from the midazolam group in the ﬁrst follow-up. 
Dakwar et al., 
2017 [184] 
(Qualitative 
analysis in 
Dakwar et al., 
2018 [185] ) 
Cocaine 
Randomized controlled trial, N = 55, 5 
days inpatient and 5 weeks outpatient. 
40-minute intravenous infusion of ketamine (0.5 mg/kg) or 
midazolam (0.025 mg/kg) on day 2 and discharge on day 5; 
Mindfulness-based relapse prevention therapy started at the 
ﬁrst week and continued for 4 weeks, twice a week. 
No serious adverse eﬀects. 
Abstinence was maintained over the last 2 weeks of the trial in 
48.2% of patients in ketamine group versus 10.7% in the 
midazolam group. 
The ketamine group was 53% less likely to relapse than the 
midazolam group and craving scores were 58.1% lower in the 
ketamine group. 
At the 6-month follow-up interview, 44% of the participants in 
the ketamine group self-reported abstinent, compared with 
none in the midazolam group. 
Dakwar et al., 
2019 [186] 
Heroin 
Randomized experimental study, N = 70, 
within subjects, inpatient (3–5 days) and 
follow- up to 24 m. 
Intramuscular administration of ketamine 2.0 mg/kg (high 
dose) or 0.2 mg/kg (low dose, active placebo) plus existentially 
oriented psychotherapy. 
High dose induced greater rate of abstinence within the ﬁrst 
24 m of follow-up than low dose. 
High dose produced a greater and longer-lasting reduction in 
craving. 
Both groups showed changes in depression, anxiety, 
anhedonia, and psychological proﬁle assessed with a battery of 
verbal tests. However, many of the variables did not diﬀer 
signiﬁcantly between high and low dose groups. 
Krupitsky et al., 
2002 [187] 
(Continued on next page) 
14 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 2 (Continued) 
Ketamine 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Main results 
Reference 
Opiates 
Randomized experimental study 
(placebo-controlled, double-blind), 
N = 50, inpatient study; 4-month 
follow-up. 
Patients under anesthesia received saline (control group) or 
ketamine infusion (0.5 mg/kg/h) preceding naloxone and 
naltrexone administration. Additional treatment with 
clonidine, carbamazepine, and clonazepam were delivered 48 h 
post-anesthesia, as well as a naloxone challenge test. 
Ketamine infusion signiﬁcantly suppressed the expression of 
precipitated opiate withdrawal and prevented rise in 
cardiovascular, respiratory, and neuroendocrine responses. 
Opiate withdrawal scores were signiﬁcantly higher in control 
group, with patients from ketamine group requiring less 
additional carbamazepine and clonazepam to maintain the 
same level of opiate withdrawal symptoms during the ﬁrst 
48 h. 
Ketamine had no long-term eﬀects on treatment of opiate 
dependence evaluated at 4 m follow-up. 
Jovai š a, 2006 
[189] 
Heroin 
Open-label study (Randomized, no 
placebo controlled trial), N = 59; inpatient 
(ﬁrst session) and outpatient (second and 
third sessions); 1-year follow-up. 
Single versus repeated (thrice) ketamine-assisted 
psychotherapy (2 mg/kg, intramuscular) plus two addiction 
counseling sessions (for both groups). 
Abstinence was reported in 50% of the multiple 
ketamine-assisted psychotherapy group, compared to 22.2% in 
the single session group at 1-year follow-up. 
No diﬀerences between groups were found in craving, 
depression, and anxiety. 
Krupitsky, 2007 
[188] 
Polysubstance 
abuse, including 
heroin and 
synthetic opioids 
Case report. 
Two individuals with a history of 
polysubstance abuse, treating opiate 
withdrawal in the induction phase of 
buprenorphine. 
Patient 1 received normal saline infusion and then ketamine 
(5 mg iv bolus, repeated once) plus magnesium sulfate and 
ketorolac (60 mg, iv), before receiving Suboxone®
(buprenorphine/naloxone) sublingual ﬁlm for 6 days. 
Patient 2 started the treatment with Suboxone® (2 sublingual 
tablets, later increased to 4 tablets, 2–3 times day) prior 
receiving ketamine (5 mg iv bolus, repeated once) and 
ketorolac (60 mg, iv). 
Patient 1 reported relief of withdrawal symptoms and pain and 
three-month follow up found that patient was not experiencing 
any withdrawal symptoms. 
Patient 2 reported improvement of pain and two-month follow 
up revealed that patient was completely free of withdrawal 
symptoms. 
Omoigui et al., 
2011 [191] 
Opioid 
Case report. 
A woman who abused oxycodone and 
codeine as pain reliever. 
Ketamine (1 mg/kg, oral solution) with gradual reduction of 
her opioid treatment (10% reduction in the initial dosage each 
two days). 
The patient reported no withdrawal symptoms, pain or 
cravings while her opioid treatment was being reduced. 
Ketamine withdrawal was achieved without withdrawal 
symptoms after a few weeks. 
Lalanne et al., 
2016 [190] 
Opioid 
Open-label study, N = 3, outpatient, 2 to 
3-week. 
45 min infusion of ketamine (0.75 mg/kg), ﬁve transcranial 
magnetic stimulation sessions and trauma interventions using 
mindfulness based extinction and reconsolidation of memories 
over two weeks. 
Craving was reduced in 65.7% and mindfulness was increased 
in 41.2% compared to baseline. 
Pradhan & Rossi, 
2020 [192] 
Cannabis 
Prospective pilot study (single-blind, no 
controlled), N = 8; 6-week outpatient. 
Motivational enhancement therapy and mindfulness-based 
relapse prevention behavioral treatment plus 50-min infusion 
of ketamine (0.71 mg/kg) at week 2 with an optional 90-min 
infusion (1.41 mg/kg) at week 4. 
The frequency of cannabis use decreased signiﬁcantly. 
Participants related that their conﬁdence regarding their ability 
to abstain from using cannabis in stressful situations was 
increased, although no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found on 
craving assessment. 
Azhari et al., 
2021 [193] 
MDMA 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention 
Main results 
Reference 
Alcohol, 
cannabis, and 
tobacco, among 
other drugs 
Reports of data gathered from individuals 
who received MDMA in a clinical setting, 
N = 28. 
MDMA (75–150 mg, orally); optionally, a second dose of 50 or 
75 mg was oﬀered with the objective of prolonging the session. 
Some subjects received propranolol or tryptophan to reduce 
discomforts. 
A decrease in substance use was reported for 14 subjects, while 
3 reported an increase. 
Greer & Tolbert, 
1986 [208] 
Alcohol 
Prospective pilot study, N = 14, open 
label, within-subject, 8-week treatment, 
9-week follow-up. 
8-week detoxiﬁcation protocol, with MDMA-assisted therapy 
performed on weeks 3 and 7 using the doses 125 and 62.5 mg 
orally two hours apart. On the sessions that MDMA-assisted 
therapy was not performed, subjects underwent psychotherapy 
sessions. 
Alcohol intake average was decreased after one month and the 
reduction was maintained after 9 months. Also, the 
MDMA-assisted therapy promoted a reduction in anxiety and 
depression rates. 
No abnormal physiological eﬀects were reported. 
Sessa, 2021 
[209] 
15 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
ergic and mesocorticolimbic associated areas, including VTA, substantia 
nigra, and PFC, whereas it increased the GDNF expression in VTA and 
pro-BDNF expression in the NAc [135] . Similar eﬀects on GDNF expres- 
sion and ethanol self-administration were observed with noribogaine 
[136] . 
As expected, preclinical models have highlighted the potential of 
ibogaine to treat SUD, due to its multiple mechanisms of action. Ibo- 
gaine was demonstrated to decrease ethanol intake in three strains of 
ethanol-preferring rats. However, this eﬀect was observed only in in- 
traperitoneal and intragastric administration routes of ibogaine, but 
not subcutaneously, suggesting that the eﬀects require the involvement 
of active metabolites since the formerly mentioned routes depend on 
the ﬁrst-pass metabolism [137] . Additionally, ibogaine decreased mor- 
phine and cocaine self-administration in rats in a dose-dependent man- 
ner, being these eﬀects dissociated from the tremorigenic eﬀects of ibo- 
gaine. The authors pointed out that these anti-addictive eﬀects observed 
may be associated with a decrease in DA and its metabolites levels in 
the NAc and striatum [ 138 , 139 ]. Another study showed that ibogaine 
attenuated morphine withdrawal-related behaviors in mice, including 
naloxone-induced jumping and NMDA-induced jumping in morphine- 
dependent and naive mice, respectively. This study suggests that ibo- 
gaine exerts its therapeutic eﬀects on opioids withdrawal syndrome and 
acts as an NMDA receptor antagonist, as demonstrated by binding as- 
say [140] . Other behavioral models showed that a pre-treatment of rats 
with 40 mg/kg ibogaine attenuated the CPP elicited by morphine or am- 
phetamine, being these eﬀects reported after one conditioning trial, but 
not after four trials spaced by a week, suggesting that continuous ad- 
ministration of ibogaine can lead to tolerance mechanisms [ 141 , 142 ]. 
The potential of ibogaine to decrease withdrawal symptoms during 
detoxiﬁcation was also demonstrated in clinical studies. Alper et al. 
[143] conducted a retrospective study with 33 patients who met the 
DSM-IV criteria for OUD with physiological symptoms between 1962 
and 1993 and were treated with ibogaine at a dose of 19.3 ± 6.9 mg/kg. 
Withdrawal symptoms were assessed by physicians and the individu- 
als were monitored for 72 h. Ibogaine attenuated withdrawal symp- 
toms in about 1–3 h and 76% of the patients had no symptoms af- 
ter 24–48 h, whereas after 72 h none of the subjects consumed sub- 
stances [143] . Nevertheless, another study evaluated 32 subjects who 
self-reported heroin or methadone dependence and met the DSM criteria 
for OUD. These patients underwent a detoxiﬁcation program of 12–14 
days and had their withdrawal and depressive symptoms assessed before 
and after an ibogaine intervention in a dosage of 800 mg (approximately 
10 mg/kg). A single dose of ibogaine reduced the depressive state and 
decreased withdrawal symptoms for up to 36 h after the administra- 
tion, as reported in the Objective Opiate Withdrawal Scale and Heroin 
Craving Questionnaire scales [144] . 
A retrospective open-label study assessed withdrawal symptoms in 
50 subjects with OUD 24 and 48 h before and after a one-week detox- 
iﬁcation protocol with ibogaine at doses of 18–20 mg/kg. The base- 
line evaluation showed that the patients had mild to severe withdrawal 
symptoms and after the one-week intervention protocol, the individuals 
showed a signiﬁcant decrease in the related symptoms [145] . An ob- 
servational open-label study with 191 patients presenting opioid and 
cocaine withdrawal symptoms according to the ASI and the DSM-IV 
showed that ibogaine detoxiﬁcation protocol decreased the depressive 
symptoms and the craving scores of the individuals, according to the 
Heroin and Cocaine Craving Questionnaires [146] . Another retrospec- 
tive study evaluated 75 subjects who reported alcohol, cannabis, co- 
caine, and crack use and were treated with ibogaine and Cognitive Be- 
havioral Therapy jointly between 2005 and 2013 [147] . The individ- 
uals underwent 1 to 9 sessions and after the last session, all women 
participants were abstinent, while 51% of the men remained abstinent 
and another 15% were abstinent through other interventions. The ab- 
stinence lasted a median of 5.5 months after the ﬁrst session, while for 
those who needed more sessions, the median before the ﬁrst session 
and all subsequent sessions was 8.4 months. The authors emphasized 
that compared with psychotherapy alone or topiramate pharmacologi- 
cal therapy, this result showed higher abstinence rates [147] . The ﬁrst 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study with noribogaine was conducted 
by Glue et al. [148] . Twenty-seven patients in methadone substitution 
therapy started receiving morphine orally a week before the experiment 
and were treated with a single dose of noribogaine (60, 120 or 180 mg) 
or placebo. The time taken by patients to order replacement therapy did 
not diﬀer between the noribogaine-treated and placebo groups, perhaps 
due to a study bias caused by the study design, according to the au- 
thors. Noribogaine showed a tendency to reduce withdrawal symptoms, 
especially with the dose of 120 mg, although this reduction was not 
statistically signiﬁcant [148] . The study also showed that noribogaine 
was well-tolerated at the tested doses, despite some side eﬀects, such 
as nausea, headache and visual changes. However, the authors suggest 
that electrocardiogram monitoring is required due to the QT interval 
cardiac eﬀects that appear to occur, analogous to ibogaine. 
Preclinical studies also evaluated the eﬀect of noribogaine instead 
of ibogaine. Noribogaine at a dose of 40 mg/kg was eﬀective in re- 
ducing morphine and cocaine self-administration in rats, and also an- 
tagonized the motor stimulant eﬀect triggered by morphine and re- 
duced dopamine and its metabolites levels in the NAc and striatum 
[149] . In addition, noribogaine dose-dependently decreased withdrawal 
symptoms in a naloxone-precipitated morphine withdrawal model in 
mice, while did not present CPP establishment, indicating that its anti- 
addictive eﬀects do not work as a substitution therapy [150] . Never- 
theless, noribogaine decreased in a dose-dependent manner the nico- 
tine intravenous self-administration in a rat model, but at the highest 
dose moderately interfered with food intake, suggesting that it is capa- 
ble of acting on non-drug reinforcing stimuli as well [151] . The authors 
suggested that the mechanism of action underlying nicotine reinforcing 
attenuation occurs due to 𝛼3 cholinergic nicotinic receptor inhibition, 
more speciﬁcally in the habenula. 
Given that ibogaine produces eﬀects that can limit its clinical appli- 
cation, such as tremors and arrhythmias [133] , synthetic analogs are 
being developed in an attempt to disentangle the therapeutic eﬀects of 
interest from unwanted eﬀects. 18-MC is the main synthetic analog of 
ibogaine and has been shown to be as eﬀective as ibogaine in reduc- 
ing cocaine, morphine, and nicotine use in self-administration paradigm 
models [152] . Additionally, 18-MC demonstrated a decrease in ethanol 
intake in a strain of ethanol-preferring rats [153] and reduced the con- 
sumption in the binge-drinking behavior of C57BL/6 mice at a dose of 
30 mg/kg [154] . In contrast to ibogaine, 18-MC has a selective eﬀect 
on nicotine intake, and it has been hypothesized that its mechanism of 
action occurs primarily via the antagonism of the 𝛼3 𝛽4 cholinergic nico- 
tinic receptor and the consequent reduction of dopamine release in the 
medial habenula [ 153 , 154 ]. More recently, novel synthetic analogs of 
ibogaine have been developed and have shown promising results with 
safer proﬁle in preclinical models, such as XL-008 and tabernanthalog 
[ 155 , 156 ]. XL-008 improved the release of GDNF in C6 glioma cells, in- 
dicating a potential against SUD [156] , while tabernanthalog decreased 
alcohol- and heroin-seeking behavior in the two-bottle paradigm [155] . 
3.2.2. Ketamine 
Ketamine was synthesized in 1962 by Calvin L. Stevens with the ob- 
jective of developing an anesthetic that could be a reliable alternative 
to phencyclidine [157] . Ketamine presents a safe and eﬀective proﬁle 
for clinical anesthetic use due to its profound analgesic eﬀects, safety 
as a short acting anesthetic and minimal side eﬀects compared to phen- 
cyclidine, but the drug induces a state of disconnection from the envi- 
ronment, which led to the coining of the term “dissociative anesthetic ”
[157] . 
Ketamine is an arylcyclohexylamine with two enantiomers, ( R )- 
ketamine and ( S )-ketamine [158] . The drug is a potent, non-competitive 
NMDA receptor antagonist but it also aﬀects several other cellular and 
molecular pathways [159] . It is a lipid soluble compound usually admin- 
istered as an injectable solution either by intravenous or intramuscular 
16 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
route, producing its eﬀects on the central nervous system within 5 min 
after injection. Ketamine is a schedule III drug, meaning that despite its 
medical use, it may present great potential for abuse and dependence 
in humans [ 158 , 160 ]. Doses from 1 to 4.5 mg/kg of racemic ketamine 
are usually employed for induction of anesthesia with lower doses for 
maintenance [161] , while subanesthetic doses are used for psychedelic 
experience [159] . On the other hand, very low doses are used on the 
treatment of depression and these doses generally do not produce strong 
psychomimetic eﬀects that may underlie ketamine’s rewarding proper- 
ties [162] . 
In fact, several studies have suggested that ketamine is an eﬀec- 
tive drug for the treatment of major depression disorder, including 
treatment-resistant depression and to decrease suicidal thoughts [162–
165] . Ketamine seems to produce fast and sustainable eﬀects for up to 
two weeks after a single dose and it was hypothesized that the antide- 
pressant eﬀect is due to improved PFC glutamate homeostasis [166] . On 
the other hand, repeated low-dose ketamine infusions have shown to be 
more eﬀective in treatment-resistant depression [162] . 
Regarding the use of ketamine for SUD, we found 16 clinical stud- 
ies which evaluated its use for cocaine, heroin, and alcohol use dis- 
order, and for the management of withdrawal symptoms from these 
substances, being two RCT, 5 RES, one prospective pilot study, three 
3 open label studies, two case reports and three not classiﬁed (reports 
of data collected from several studies or treatments) ( Table 2 ). Evgeny 
Krupitsky was a pioneer in studying the eﬀect of ketamine in the treat- 
ment of drug dependence. His-experience treating AUD patients was 
described in an anecdotal report for the Multidisciplinary Association 
for Psychedelic Studies [167] and in a review of ten years of research 
[168] . Krupitsky reported that from 111 alcohol users that received Ke- 
tamine Psychedelic Therapy, 65.5% showed total abstinence for more 
than one year, compared to 24% of the conventional treatment group. 
Ketamine Psychedelic Therapy (also referred to Ketamine-assisted Ther- 
apy) consisted of three phases [ 159 , 169 ]: a preparation session (when 
patients underwent a preliminary psychotherapy session with a psy- 
chotherapist that explained what are expected from the ketamine ex- 
perience); the ketamine session per se (when the psychotherapist also 
interacted with the patient); and a group psychotherapy performed with 
patients and therapist the day after the ketamine session (whose goal 
was to help the patients to integrate insights of psychedelic experience 
into their lives). Krupitsky et al. [167] also reported the results of the 
combination of ketamine (3 mg/kg, im) and aversive approaches in 
alcoholism treatment, what they called “Aﬀective Contra-attribution ”
method. The control group received traditional methods of treatment 
(not clearly explained in the paper). After one year, almost 70% of 
the experimental group treated with ketamine was fully abstinent from 
alcohol, compared to only 24% of the control group. However, this 
study does not present detailed experimental data to allow independent 
conclusions. 
Kolp et al. [170] collected data from AUD patients treated with ke- 
tamine using diﬀerent methods, based on various case reports and pre- 
vious works of Krupitsky. The methods included individual outpatient 
treatment for 6 weeks and group psychotherapeutic programs oﬀered 
as part of an intensive residential rehabilitation program with diﬀer- 
ent durations (1 to 3 weeks), being the 3-week program composed by 
two administrations of ketamine. The average abstinence rate after one 
year varied between 25 and 70% depending on the treatment schedule. 
Although results seem very satisfactory, Kolp did not conduct formal 
clinical studies; instead, he collected data from patients from his pri- 
vate practice and the doses of ketamine were not reported, making the 
results questionable. 
Recently, a small 8-week open-label pilot study evaluated the combi- 
nation of naltrexone and ketamine in depressive patients with history of 
AUD [171] . Five patients received injectable naltrexone (380 mg) and 2–
6 days later repeated intravenous ketamine treatment (0.5 mg/kg once 
a week for 4 weeks). The combination of naltrexone and ketamine was 
associated with reduced depressive symptoms and improvement in al- 
cohol craving and consumption, measured by the Obsessive-Compulsive 
Drinking Scale. 
So far, we found two controlled clinical trials with ketamine for AUD. 
Dakwar et al. [172] investigated the eﬀect of a single ketamine infu- 
sion combined with Motivational Enhancement Therapy for AUD. In 
this randomized pilot trial, 40 patients received ketamine (0.71 mg/kg) 
or midazolam (0.025 mg/kg, active control) during the second week 
of a 5-week outpatient regimen. After 3 weeks of the infusions, 59.1% 
of participants in the control group had used alcohol with 40.9% re- 
porting a heavy drinking day, while in the ketamine group the per- 
centages were 47.1 and 17.6%, respectively. The participants were con- 
tacted and interviewed by telephone 6 months later, and among those 
that could be reached, 75% of the ketamine group self-reported being 
abstinent versus 27% in the midazolam group. The authors suggested 
that a single ketamine infusion improved measures of drinking in alco- 
hol dependents, but they state that the data is preliminary and further 
research should be conducted in a large sample. As a secondary anal- 
ysis, authors observed that ketamine led to a signiﬁcant reduction in 
at-risk drinking and greater mystical-type eﬀects and dissociation com- 
pared to the active control, increasing evidence to the importance of 
mystical-type experiences in SUD treatment [173] . The other random- 
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial is being conducted 
as a preliminary assessment of the eﬀectiveness of a combined repeated 
ketamine and psychological therapy program [174] . The protocol in- 
cludes either three sessions of ketamine (0.8 mg/kg) or placebo (50 ml 
saline 0.9%) administered intravenously over 40 min plus either seven 
sessions of Manualized Psychological Therapy or an Alcohol Education 
Control. The ﬁnal data of this study is yet not available, but a subsample 
with 12 participants that completed the trial was qualitatively evaluated 
by semi-structured interviews [175] . Authors report that ketamine treat- 
ment led to a signiﬁcant change in relationship with alcohol and the set 
and setting was found to be important in determining acute ketamine 
experiences. 
Das et al. [176] investigated whether intravenous ketamine given 
during the so-called “reconsolidation window ” would interfere with the 
reconsolidation of maladaptive reward memories in harmful drinkers 
(people with high use of alcohol, but who do not have a formal diag- 
nosis of AUD). Ketamine infusion (350 ng/mL for 30 min) following 
the retrieval/destabilization of maladaptive alcohol memories induced 
a rapid reduction in the reinforcing and motivational properties of al- 
cohol and substantially lasting reductions in drinking levels compared 
to the other groups (see details of the protocol in Das et al. [176] ). This 
result indirectly supports the idea that psychotherapeutic interventions 
are necessary to obtain the therapeutic eﬀect of ketamine in the treat- 
ment of AUD/SUD. Other incomplete and ongoing studies evaluating the 
potential of ketamine for AUD are presented in Worrel & Gould [177] . 
The neurobiological mechanisms underlying the therapeutic eﬀects 
of ketamine for AUD and some issues regarding its repeated use were dis- 
cussed in a recent review [160] . It is known that chronic use of alcohol 
increases glutamatergic transmission through NMDA receptors potenti- 
ation in reward-related brain regions such as the NAc and dorsomedial 
striatum. Although acute administration of ketamine blockades NMDA 
glutamatergic receptors, studies suggest that repeated ketamine expo- 
sure enhances the glutamatergic transmission in NAc and other areas. 
Because alcoholism is a lifelong disorder, repeated ketamine infusions 
might be required for maintaining long-term alcohol abstinence, which 
brings concerns about the safety of its use in AUD [160] . 
Some retrospective studies analyzed the data of patients who re- 
ceived ketamine as adjunctive medication to benzodiazepines, specif- 
ically for management of alcohol withdrawal syndrome [178–180] . The 
authors showed that ketamine was well tolerated at low doses and 
appeared to reduce benzodiazepines requirements, i.e., the dose re- 
quired for management of alcohol withdrawal syndrome. These studies 
analyzed only the data from the hospitalization period, and they did 
not report long term outcomes or abstinence and relapse rates. Krys- 
tal et al. [181] observed that recently detoxiﬁed alcohol-dependent pa- 
17 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
tients showed reduced perceptual alterations, dysphoric mood, and im- 
paired executive cognitive functions induced by ketamine compared to 
the healthy group, suggesting that alcohol dependence produced some 
alterations in NMDA receptor function possibly relevant for the treat- 
ment of AUD. 
The eﬀectiveness of ketamine was also investigated for cocaine use 
disorder. Dakwar et al. [182] evaluated the eﬀect of ketamine infu- 
sion on cocaine users in a crossover, double-blind trial using lorazepam 
as an active control. Participants underwent a 10-minute Mindfulness- 
based Exercise and then received infusions of two doses of ketamine 
(0.41 and 0.71 mg/kg) or lorazepam (2 mg) separated by intervals of 
48 h. The motivation to halt drug use and craving induced by drug cues 
were assessed 24 h after each drug administration. According to the 
authors, Ketamine infusions were well tolerated, increased the motiva- 
tion to stop using substances and reduced cue-induced craving. Authors 
also evaluated the mystical-type eﬀects (adapted from Hood’s Mysti- 
cism Scale) and found that ketamine led to signiﬁcantly greater acute 
mystical-type eﬀects compared to the active control lorazepam and with 
higher scores obtained with the dose 0.71 mg/kg [183] . The authors 
suggested that psychological mechanisms may be involved in the ther- 
apeutic beneﬁts of ketamine for SUD. In another study, Dakwar et al. 
[184] aimed to evaluate the eﬀect of ketamine in the behavioral shifts 
in the salience of cocaine versus money paradigm in non-depressive co- 
caine users not seeking treatment. The authors reported that Ketamine 
infusion (0.71 mg/kg) decreased cocaine choice by 67% in post-baseline 
evaluation compared to midazolam (0.025 mg/kg) [184] . Similarly to 
the previous study, the authors found that mystical-type eﬀects were 
greater after ketamine infusion compared to midazolam [185] . The same 
group also evaluated the eﬀect of ketamine combined with Mindfulness- 
based Relapse Prevention Therapy [186] . Fifty-ﬁve individuals seeking 
treatment for cocaine use disorder were hospitalized for 5 days and re- 
ceived daily sessions of the behavioral treatment and a 40-minute intra- 
venous infusion of ketamine (0.5 mg/kg) or midazolam (0.025 mg/kg) 
on day two. Participants returned twice weekly for 4 weeks for Behav- 
ioral Therapy sessions, monitoring and measures. About 48% of the 
participants from the ketamine group maintained abstinence after two 
weeks of the trial and only 10% in the midazolam group. Also, the re- 
lapse ratio and craving scores were statistically lower in the ketamine 
group compared to the active control group. 
Other studies investigated the use of ketamine in the management 
of withdrawal symptoms of opioid dependents and detoxiﬁed patients. 
Krupitsky et al. [187] evaluated the eﬀect of Ketamine Psychotherapy in 
heroin users that had just completed acute detoxiﬁcation. The patients 
received Existentially Oriented Psychotherapy in combination with an 
intense hallucinogenic dose of ketamine (2.0 mg/kg, im), or a low, non- 
hallucinogenic dose (0.2 mg/kg im), employed as active placebo. The 
study was double-blinded, and the therapy consisted of a preparation 
session before the infusion and a sequent session to help subjects to es- 
tablish a connection between the ketamine experience and their desire 
to quit substance use. A higher rate of abstinence as well as greater 
and longer-lasting reduction in craving were observed after the ﬁrst 
two years of follow-up for the group that received the higher dose of 
ketamine, which also had greater positive change in nonverbal uncon- 
scious emotional attitudes. In a subsequent similar study, Krupitsky et al. 
[188] compared the eﬀect of a single dose versus repeated sessions of 
Ketamine-assisted Psychotherapy in detoxiﬁed heroin users. All subjects 
had a ketamine (2.0 mg/kg, im) session prior to their discharge from the 
hospital and then were randomized into two groups: one received two 
Addiction Counseling Sessions and ketamine administration one and 
two months later, while the other had only the two Addiction Coun- 
seling Sessions. After a one-year follow-up, ﬁfty percent of the subjects 
from the three sessions of Ketamine-assisted Psychotherapy group re- 
mained abstinent versus 22% from the control group, but no diﬀerences 
were observed in craving rates for heroin. 
Another study investigated the eﬀect of placebo (saline) or ketamine 
infusion (0.5 mg/kg/h) on the precipitated opiate withdrawal induced 
by naloxone and naltrexone administration under anesthesia in patients 
with OUD. Ketamine signiﬁcantly suppressed the expression of precip- 
itated opiate withdrawal and prevented signiﬁcant rise in cardiovascu- 
lar, respiratory and neuroendocrine response compared to the control 
group [189] . Patients were enrolled in an aftercare program of their 
choice following hospital discharge and were contacted after 4 months 
when they answered a questionnaire based on ASI. Authors concluded 
that ketamine was an eﬀective adjuvant in the acute phase of precipi- 
tated opiate withdrawal, but the 4-month follow-up showed that it had 
no long term eﬀects on treatment of OUD. We also found some case re- 
ports about the use of ketamine in the management of opioid withdrawal 
symptoms. These reports suggest that ketamine was useful to reduce the 
severity of the withdrawal phase of patients under opioid detoxiﬁcation 
[ 190 , 191 ]. 
An open-label proof of concept study was designed to test the feasi- 
bility and eﬃcacy of ketamine (single infusion of 0.75 mg/kg adminis- 
tered over a 45-minute period), ﬁve Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation 
sessions, and trauma interventions using Mindfulness Based Extinction 
and Reconsolidation of Memories in three patients diagnosed with OUD 
[192] . The combination therapy reduced craving in 65.7% compared 
to baseline and increased mindfulness in 41.2% suggesting a synergistic 
eﬀect of these therapies. No further clinical studies were found with ke- 
tamine for OUD. Another proof of concept trial evaluated the feasibility 
of ketamine in 8 cannabis-dependent individuals receiving Motivational 
Enhancement Therapy and Mindfulness-based Relapse Prevention be- 
havioral treatments [193] . Participants received an infusion of ketamine 
(0.71 mg/kg) and a second infusion (1.41 mg/kg), in the case of non- 
responders. Self-reported cannabis use was decreased in the week after 
the ﬁrst infusion, compared to baseline, and remained reduced at the 
end of the study. 
The therapeutic potential of ketamine for SUD is supported by sev- 
eral preclinical studies. For instance, ketamine dose-dependently re- 
duced ethanol drinking in alcohol-preferring rats in a model of self- 
administration [194] and reduced self-administration of nicotine in an 
operant box [195] . Franco et al. [196] evaluated the early-life ketamine 
exposure (from day 20 to day 39 postnatal) on the preference for ethanol 
in adolescent Sprague-Dawley rats. Ketamine administration in male 
rats attenuated the rewarding properties of ethanol in the CPP paradigm 
with all tested doses, while ketamine-pretreated female rats needed a 
higher dose of ethanol to exhibit ethanol-induced CPP. Fuller et al. 
[197] showed that d -amphetamine withdrawal decreased BDNF levels 
throughout the limbic system and these eﬀects were reversed by treat- 
ment with ketamine on day 4 post-amphetamine, suggesting that ke- 
tamine could oﬀer relief from withdrawal symptoms. Garcia-Carachure 
et al. [198] evaluated the eﬀect of repeated ketamine treatment in ju- 
venile and adult C57BL/6 mice from both sex in rewarding properties 
of sucrose and cocaine in adulthood. The results varied depending on 
the protocol, but in brief, they found that adolescent ketamine expo- 
sure increases later life preference for the rewarding properties of su- 
crose and cocaine in a sex- and age-speciﬁc manner. Other studies exam- 
ined the eﬀect of the enantiomers. ( R )-ketamine attenuated naloxone- 
precipitated withdrawal signs in rats sub-chronically treated with mor- 
phine and blocked morphine-induced place preference in mice [199] . 
The authors also found that ( R )-ketamine did not induce CPP by itself. 
Another study using the CPP model observed that (R,S)-ketamine re- 
duced anxiety-like behavior of mice in an elevated plus-maze follow- 
ing morphine conditioning on CPP and prevented morphine-induced 
CPP [200] . In addition, ketamine also attenuated sucrose-induced CPP 
suggesting that besides alleviating negative aﬀective states, it also may 
act by potentially impairing memory of morphine-context associations. 
Finally, it is worth to mention that S( + )-ketamine presents more 
aﬃnity for the NMDA receptor and it is postulated that it promotes 
greater analgesic and anesthetic activity with fewer psychotomimetic ef- 
fects than the R(-)-ketamine form or the racemic mixture, providing sim- 
ilar clinical beneﬁts with fewer adverse eﬀects [158] . However, other 
studies suggest that ( R )-ketamine might provide a better overall phar- 
18 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
macological proﬁle for the treatment of depression and SUD with less 
detrimental side-eﬀects [ 199 , 201 , 202 ]. In conclusion, there is robust ev- 
idence of the therapeutic potential of ketamine for depression, but the 
potential beneﬁts of each enantiomer, particularly for the treatment of 
SUD, still needs further investigation. 
3.2.3. MDMA 
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, also known as “ecstasy ”, 
“molly ”, “XTC ” or “Adam ” is a psychedelic derived from amphetamine 
which was ﬁrst synthesized in 1912 and subsequently patented by Merck 
in 1914. The increasing reports of use of this psychedelic in recreational 
context in the decades of 1960 and 1970 in the USA led to its clas- 
siﬁcation as a Schedule I drug in 1985 [ 203 , 204 ]. MDMA is a ring- 
substituted amphetamine, and its action mechanisms are mainly due to 
the monoamines reuptake inhibition, more speciﬁcally serotonin, and to 
a lesser extent, norepinephrine and dopamine. MDMA also increases the 
release of monoamines and acts as a direct serotonergic agonist, bind- 
ing with 5-HT 1A , 5-HT 1B and 5-HT 2A receptors, as well with adrenergic, 
histaminergic, muscarinic and sigma-1 receptors [ 203 , 205 ]. 
Frequently, MDMA use is associated with prosocial eﬀects, includ- 
ing improved mood, friendliness and increased energy, which can be 
associated with oxytocin enhancement triggered by its action on 5- 
HT 1A receptors [ 203 , 206 ]. However, MDMA presents side eﬀects, such 
as anxiety, arrhythmias, cognitive impairment, hyperthermia and sero- 
tonin syndrome risk and its metabolites can lead to liver toxicity and 
neurotoxicity [ 203 , 206 ]. Furthermore, it is also known that MDMA is 
commonly used jointly with other substances, especially alcohol and 
cannabis. When combined with alcohol, the MDMA reinforcement ef- 
fect is increased due to the improvement in DA levels, leading to a eu- 
phoric state, and if combined with cannabis, its stimulant eﬀect may be 
decreased [207] . 
Although MDMA-assisted Therapy has been studied for the treat- 
ment of psychiatric disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder, 
anxiety and depression, its use for SUD remains poorly explored – we 
only found one prospective pilot study and one study with the objec- 
tive of evaluating the psychological improvement of participants after a 
MDMA-assisted session ( Table 2 ). This study describes the subjective re- 
ports of individuals with diﬀerent psychological problems after having 
a MDMA session (with an optional second dose) and shows that besides 
having favorable eﬀects on participants’ attitudes and feelings, MDMA 
decreased substance use, including alcohol, cannabis and tobacco [208] . 
Sessa [209] hypothesized that MDMA can present therapeutic poten- 
tial in AUD considering the trauma-related comorbidities that often fol- 
low this disorder and MDMA’s empathogen features. In addition, the 
author suggests that therapeutic properties for SUD observed for clas- 
sic psychedelics are an indication that further investigation on MDMA 
might also show promising eﬀects since these substances share simi- 
lar action mechanisms [209] . Jerome et al. [210] argued that MDMA- 
assisted Therapy can be useful in SUD considering its prosocial eﬀects 
and the changes in perception, mediated by oxytocin release. In addi- 
tion, authors discuss that the lack of studies on MDMA is partly due to 
substance misuse being an exclusion criterion in clinical trials involving 
this psychedelic since some authors fear that it may be liable to harmful 
use; however, in a clinical trial’s controlled environment it is preconized 
as safe [210] . 
Recently, the ﬁrst clinical trial evaluating the safety and tolerabil- 
ity of MDMA-assisted Therapy in patients who met the DSM-V criteria 
for AUD was conducted [211] . Fourteen patients underwent an 8-week 
therapy protocol and received oral administration of MDMA (125 and 
62.5 mg, respectively, two hours apart) at weeks 3 and 7. All partic- 
ipants underwent prior detoxiﬁcation and had their levels of alcohol 
consumption, anxiety and depression assessed for 9 months. In addi- 
tion, physiological parameters such as blood pressure, temperature and 
heart rate were assessed during MDMA-assisted Therapy sessions, and 
no signiﬁcant alterations were reported, and medical support was not 
needed. Regarding alcohol drinking rates, the subjects reported a mean 
of 130.6 units of alcohol consumption per week before the intervention, 
and a decrease was observed one month after detoxiﬁcation, which con- 
tinued after 9 months, when the average weekly consumption was 18.7 
units. Reductions in depression and anxiety rates were also observed. 
However, this study was not blinded or placebo-controlled and had a 
small number of subjects [211] . 
A few preclinical studies have indirectly evaluated MDMA’s thera- 
peutic eﬀects for SUD. It was reported that MDMA decreased, in a dose- 
dependent manner, THC withdrawal symptoms in mice when adminis- 
tered both acutely and chronically [212] . Also, MDMA administration 
increased 5-HT release in the PFC. Taken together, these ﬁndings sug- 
gest that MDMA attenuates abstinence in rats acting through a sero- 
tonergic pathway capable of attenuating withdrawal behavioral signs 
[212] . Besides that, MDMA induced CPP in rats but decreased ethanol 
intake, in contrast with other drugs, such as morphine, which induces 
CPP and increases ethanol intake. However, this interference in alcohol 
intake was not speciﬁc, since water intake was also aﬀected and it was 
not long-term observed [213] . In addition, a preliminary report showed 
that both MDMA and its enantiomer R(-)-MDMA reduced cocaine self- 
administration in squirrel monkeys. Furthermore, R(-)-MDMA was also 
able to block amphetamine-induced CPP in mice [214] . 
Taken together, the preliminary data assessed from both preclinical 
and clinical studies suggest that MDMA-assisted Therapy is worth being 
investigated, especially for the treatment for SUD. In particular, the ben- 
eﬁts of MDMA-assisted Therapy should be evaluated in large samples of 
patients with SUD associated with psychiatric conditions. 
3.2.4. Salvinorin A 
Salvia divinorum , commonly named “pastora ”, “sage ”, or simply 
“salvia ”, is a plant of the mint family (Lamiaceae) with psychoactive 
properties when its leaves are consumed by chewing, smoking, or as a 
tea [215] . The Mazateca’s culture used Salvia divinorum for centuries 
both for ritualistic and therapeutic purposes as a medicine to treat 
headaches, anemia, rheumatism, diarrhea, among others [215] . Its main 
psychoactive component is salvinorin A, a neoclerodan diterpene that 
acts diﬀerently from most of the substances mentioned in this article 
since it has no aﬃnity for the serotonergic receptor 5-HT 2A [216] . 
Animal and in vitro research show that salvinorin A acts mainly 
as a selective agonist for kappa -type opioid receptors along with al- 
losteric modulation of endocannabinoid receptors type 1 [217–220] . 
Interestingly, the activation of kappa -opioid receptors reduces synaptic 
dopamine in diﬀerent brain regions, including the NAc [221] . In some 
ways, it is the opposite eﬀect of stimulant substances like cocaine and 
amphetamine, which increase dopamine release in these regions [222] . 
Studies using salvinorin A or Salvia divinorum itself in humans 
are limited and relatively scarce. The most recent research regarding 
the therapeutic potential of salvinorin A is largely related to its anti- 
inﬂammatory and analgesic capacity in addition to gastrointestinal and 
mood disorders, neurological diseases and drug addiction [ 218 , 223 ], 
but no clinical studies were found for salvinorin A and SUD. Despite the 
dearth of studies in humans, the therapeutic potential of kappa -opioid 
receptor agonists against dependence of stimulant drugs has been ex- 
plored in preclinical research [224] . Tomasiewicz et al. [225] identiﬁed 
that an experimental kappa agonist drug reduced the reward-related ef- 
fects of cocaine and might improve symptoms of conditions character- 
ized by increased motivation and hyperfunction of brain reward sys- 
tems, such as mania and stimulant intoxication, observed after chronic 
cocaine use in rodents. Another study with rats showed the ability of 
2 mg/kg salvinorin A to block the behavioral sensitivity (locomotor re- 
sponse) generated by cocaine ingestion [226] . Kivell et al. [227] also 
conﬁrmed the potential of salvinorin A (2 mg/kg) and Mesyl Sal B 
(0.3 mg/kg, a potent and selective kappa -opioid receptor analogue of 
salvinorin A) in mitigating the behavioral eﬀects of cocaine-induced hy- 
peractivity and behavioral sensitization to cocaine. 
Other studies carried out by Morani et al. [ 228 , 229 ] showed that 
salvinorin A (0.3 mg/kg) might attenuate cocaine-induced drug-seeking 
19 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
and cocaine prime-induced reinstatement in self-administration models 
in rodents. Researchers noted that salvinorin A attenuated the expres- 
sion of behavioral sensitization induced by cocaine and did not attenuate 
responses to natural rewards, such as sucrose. It was also possible to ob- 
serve that the substance did not aﬀect spontaneous locomotion, cocaine- 
induced stereotypy, cocaine-induced hyperactivity, or conditioned taste 
aversion, suggesting that the dose of 0.3 mg/kg salvinorin A is suﬃcient 
to produce attenuation of drug-seeking in mice and does not cause se- 
dation or aversion [229] . However, salvinorin A induced pro-depressive 
eﬀects, which may limit its therapeutic potential. 
Potter et al. [230] investigated the eﬀects of repeated administra- 
tion of salvinorin A (2 mg/kg) on the reward-potentiation of cocaine, to- 
gether with the activation of extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK), 
cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), and immunoreactivity 
of c-Fos within the NAc. Repeated administration of salvinorin A de- 
creased reward-potentiating eﬀects of cocaine along with changes in the 
immunoreactivity of proteins, such as increased phosphorylated CREB 
and increased phosphorylated ERK. A study with non-human primates 
observed that salvinorin A at very-low doses administered by repeat- 
edly intravenous injections (0,3–1 μg/kg each injection) decreased the 
choice for cocaine and remifentanil (a potent, short-acting synthetic opi- 
oid analgesic drug) in a self-administration model. The researchers sug- 
gest that the kappa -opiod agonist acts as a punisher to consumption of 
drugs in operant choice procedures [231] . 
Finally, it is important to note that the acute activation of kappa - 
opioid receptors may produce anti-addictive eﬀects by regulating DA 
levels in the brain [221] . Currently, there is an eﬀort to improve the 
pharmacokinetics and tolerability of this compound, based on the struc- 
ture of salvinorin A [232] . While work in this ﬁeld is still under develop- 
ment, analogs with improved pharmacokinetic proﬁles are demonstrat- 
ing anti-addiction eﬀects. Details about the studies involving synthetic 
opioid agonists and analogs of salvinorin A to treat addiction can be 
found in a review conducted by Kivell et al. [232] . Although research is 
still in the early stages, these compounds, together with the ancestral use 
of “pastora’’, hold promise for the future development of anti-addiction 
therapies. 
3.2.5. Cannabis and tetrahydrocannabinol 
Cannabis spp. is an Asiatic plant that seems to have accompanied 
humankind’s peregrinations [233] and it is one of the oldest domesti- 
cated plants known for several purposes [234] . For millennia cannabis 
has been used for ﬁber, textile, nutritional, therapeutic, sedative and 
ritualistic purposes, among several other applications. 
The therapeutic employment of preparations containing cannabis is 
observed alongside a large array of archeological evidence retrieved 
throughout history from early cultures and was likely developed to- 
gether with its spiritual usage [235] . The role as a therapeutic alterna- 
tive for harmful substance use had been mentioned in scientiﬁc litera- 
ture from the 19th century, when Birch [236] described how the admin- 
istration of a mixture containing Cannabis indica immediately acted as 
an “appetite stimulant and inductor of sleep ” for two patients presenting 
“chloral addiction and opium poisoning ”, respectively. Similar ﬁndings 
were observed 110 years later, when Labigalini et al. [237] published 
an observational study with crack-cocaine users who attempted to halt 
consumption by substituting it with smoked cannabis. 
An expressive number of high quality cross-sectional studies pre- 
sented in a systematic review [238] demonstrated a trend of people who 
use drugs using cannabis and their derivatives as a substitute for alcohol, 
heroin and other opioids, stimulants and other substances they may con- 
sider harmful. In fact, several studies have reported reduction or substi- 
tution of alcohol consumption for individuals using cannabis [239–244] . 
Additionally, a recent systematic review demonstrated how legally ac- 
cessed cannabis may serve as a substitute for alcohol [245] . Cannabis 
use also seems to be a recurrent strategy among people who use drugs 
for reducing harmful drug use, to mitigate speciﬁc symptoms of opioid 
withdrawal [246–248] , and to improve the quality of life of opioid users 
[ 249 , 250 ]. Those are important ﬁndings from a public health and epi- 
demiology perspective, since opioid users, especially those who inject, 
are among the most vulnerable population of drug consumers and have 
greater risk of being exposed to infectious diseases [ 2 , 251 ] 
The main active compounds of cannabis are THC and cannabidiol 
(CBD) which interact with cannabinoid receptors type 1 (CB 1 ) and type 
2 (CB 2 ). Isolation of Δ9 -THC was only achieved in the second half of 
the twentieth century [252] , followed by the relatively recent discov- 
ery of the cannabinoid receptors 24 years later [253] . Δ9 -THC is the 
major psychoactive, pleasure-related compound in cannabis, and it is 
responsible for repeated consumption and for some therapeutic prop- 
erties [24] . Also, Δ9 -THC may promote subjective eﬀects and disturb 
time, space and sensory perceptions, which explain why it may be con- 
sidered the ‘psychedelic’ component in cannabis [25] . Despite that, the 
classiﬁcation of cannabis as a psychedelic substance remains unsettled. 
Experiencing the psychedelic eﬀects of cannabis may be seen by some 
authors [254] as a symptom linked to trait impulsivity, for instance, 
although a recent study demonstrated that high doses of cannabis can 
induce mystical experiences similar to those experienced with psilocy- 
bin [255] . Although milder than entheogens like mescaline and psilocy- 
bin, cannabis has also accompanied humankind and it is still sought in 
contemporary times for inducing mystical, transcendental, psychedelic 
or hallucinogenic experiences [ 256 , 257 ]. Additionally, psychedelic sub- 
stances have diverse pharmacology and heterogeneous mechanisms of 
action [258] and are mostly considered as such by its ability to promote 
altered states of perception and thoughts, although the terms ‘classic 
psychedelics’ or ‘serotonergic psychedelics’ are being employed to elu- 
cidate these particularities [ 19 , 259 ]. Nonetheless, organizations such 
as the Beckley Foundation and the Multidisciplinary Association for 
Psychedelic Sciences hold important publications and ongoing research 
investigating therapeutic eﬀects of cannabis and cannabinoids [260–
262] . This session attempted to gather studies investigating how the 
psychedelic component in cannabis, THC, could act as therapeutic agent 
for continuous drug consumption or SUD. 
Of all the several roles that the endocannabinoid system portrays, 
signaling on the brain reward circuitry might explain its conception as a 
promising target for the treatment of SUD. CB 1 receptors are extensively 
located in the brain and their modulation over striatal regions such as 
the VTA and NAc pathways regulate reward tone [263] . Cannabinoids, 
especially Δ9 -THC, but also CBD and synthetic analogues, are being ex- 
tensively studied as a potential cannabinoid-receptor agonist therapy for 
SUD, perhaps following the same trend of nicotine [ 264 , 265 ] and opi- 
oid [266] agonist and antagonist pharmacotherapies. Currently, there 
are three cannabinoid-based medications approved for the treatment of 
symptoms of cancer, chronic pain, and multiple sclerosis [267] . Dron- 
abinol, a synthetic Δ9 -THC; nabilone, a Δ9 -THC analog; and nabiximols, 
a preparation of two diﬀerent chemovars of cannabis oil with a 1:1 Δ9 - 
THC and CBD ratio, are being tested for decreasing withdrawal symp- 
toms severity, especially in cases of Cannabis Use Disorder (CUD), but 
also in cases of OUD and Tobacco Use Disorder. Sloan et al. [268] pre- 
sented a high-quality review of RCT and within-subject randomized tri- 
als using these medications for those conditions, and an update of a 
Cochrane Systematic Review demonstrated that only preparations con- 
taining Δ9 -THC were eﬀective for decreasing the severity of withdrawal 
symptoms in patients with CUD [269] . We will consider these studies 
and gather newly published data to appraise this review of cannabis and 
cannabinoids for SUD. 
We selected 19 studies demonstrating the role of Δ9 -THC as a 
cannabinoid receptor agonist therapy for people diagnosed or demon- 
strating patterns of SUD ( Table 3 ). Six of those studies are high qual- 
ity RCT, one demonstrates the role of dronabinol in OUD, in addi- 
tion to opioid-antagonist XR-naltrexone [270] , and the other ﬁve used 
nabiximols [271–273] and dronabinol [ 274 , 275 ] for CUD. Levin et al. 
[275] was the only RCT that could not achieve most of their proposed 
outcomes, which authors attributed to an unexpected diﬃculty for par- 
ticipants tolerating the maximum doses of lofexidine, an adrenergic 𝛼2A 
20 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 3 
Human studies using cannabis and oral cannabinoids for substance use disorder. 
Cannabis and oral cannabinoids 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention and compositions 
Main results 
Reference 
Cannabis 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 7, 
35-day, 15-day inpatient, 5-day 
outpatient, 15-day inpatient. 
Dronabinol 10 mg + smoked 
cannabis (3.04% THC). 
Dro 10 mg decreased ratings of anxiety, trouble sleeping and chills during 
abstinence. 
Craving reported as “Mild ” to “Moderate ”. 
No eﬀect on sleep ratings. 
Dro decreased performance on DSST. 
Dro 10 mg increased food intake and body weight average was higher during 
cannabis abstinence. 
No eﬀect on tobacco smoking. 
Haney et al., 2004 [277] 
Cannabis 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 8, 
40-day, outpatient. 
Dronabinol 10, 30 or 90mg. 
Reduced withdrawal symptoms severity. 
Signiﬁcant eﬀect on craving. 
Improved overall subjective sleep quality. 
Increase on body weight. 
Dose dependent THC eﬀect, “drug eﬀect/good eﬀect/liked/high ” ratings observed 
especially with 90 mg. 
No serious adverse events. 
Budney et al., 2007 
[276] 
Cannabis 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 8, 
28-day, inpatient phase / 
outpatient washout (7 days each 
phase). 
Dronabinol 60 mg or Lofexidine 
2.4 mg or the combination 
Dronabinol 60 mg + Lofexidine 
2.4mg. 
Dro 60 mg reduced withdrawal symptoms severity (anorexia, weight loss, sleep 
latency). 
Dro + Lofexidine decreased number of cigarettes per day. 
Recreation period for socialization was decreased by each medication. 
All three medication decreased systolic and diastolic blood pressure. 
Lofexidine and Dro + Lofexidine decreased cannabis self-administration. 
Dro + Lofexidine doubled the chances of achieving consecutive days of abstinence. 
Haney et al., 2008 [278] 
Cannabis 
Randomized controlled trial, 
N = 156, 9-week, outpatient. 
Psychotherapy + Dronabinol 
40mg. 
Reduced withdrawal symptoms severity. 
Higher retention in treatment. 
No abstinence score diﬀerences. 
Medication well tolerated. 
Levin et al., 2011 [274] 
Cannabis 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 11, 
24-day, inpatient. 
Nabilone 6 or 8 mg + smoked 
cannabis (5.6% THC). 
Both Nabilone conditions decreased cannabis use and continued decreasing 3 days 
after. 
Decreased ratings of “irritable ”, “bad eﬀect ”, “social ” and “marijuana craving ”. 
Increased numbers of hours slept and of “sleep well ” and reduced “woke often ”
ratings. 
Increased caloric intake, number of daily eating occasions and altered macronutrient 
intake. 
Reduced task performance on the DSST. 
No inﬂuence on tobacco consumption. 
Haney et al., 2013 [283] 
Cannabis 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 13, 
5-day, outpatient. 
Dronabinol 30, 60 or 120 mg. 
Decrease of loss of appetite, diarrhea, nausea, stomach pain, irritability, chills and 
headaches. 
Cognitive performance 3% less accurate during Dro conditions than placebo. 
Vandrey et al., 2013 
[282] 
Cannabis 
Randomized controlled trial, 
N = 51, 6-day, inpatient. 
Psychotherapy + Nabiximols 
(88.4 mg THC, 80 mg CBD). 
Reduced withdrawal symptoms severity. 
Higher retention in treatment. 
Use reduction in follow-up, no score diﬀerences. 
Medication well tolerated. 
No serious adverse events. 
Allsop et al., 2014 [271] 
Cannabis 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 14, 
3-day, inpatient. 
Dronabinol 10 or 20mg. 
Lowered blood pressure. 
Elevated heart rate. 
“Urge to smoke ” / “Desire to use ” attenuated. 
Anxiety decreased. 
Lundahl & Greenwald, 
2015 [281] 
Opioids 
Randomized controlled trial, 
N = 60, 6-week, inpatient. 
Psychotherapy + Dronabinol 
30 mg; XR-naltrexone up to 25 
mg. 
Withdrawal scores decreased. 
Similar retention rates. 
Cannabis smokers had lower insomnia and anxiety ratings. 
Medication well tolerated. 
No serious adverse events. 
Bisaga et al., 2015 [270] 
( continued on next page ) 
21 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
Table 3 ( continued ) 
Cannabis and oral cannabinoids 
Substance 
Type of study and sample 
Intervention and compositions 
Main results 
Reference 
Cannabis 
Randomized controlled trial, 
N = 122, 8-week, outpatient. 
Psychotherapy + Dronabinol 
60 mg + Lofexidine 2.4mg. 
No abstinence score diﬀerences. 
Withdrawal scores decreased over time. 
Similar retention rates. 
Medication not well tolerated. 
No serious adverse events. 
Levin et al., 2016 [275] 
Cannabis 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 11, 
8-day, inpatient. 
Nabilone 6 mg + Zolpidem 
12.5 mg or Zolpidem 12.5mg. 
Both medications combined: 
Reduced withdrawal symptoms severity. 
Decreased disruptions in sleep, mood and food intake. 
Decreased cannabis use. 
Increased rating of strong/good/bad drug eﬀect. 
Neither medication altered cognitive performance. 
Herrmann et al., 2016 
[284] 
Cannabis 
Prospective pilot study, N = 9, 
8-week, outpatient. 
Nabiximols (108 mg THC, 
100 mg CBD). 
7 of 9 participants remained abstinent. 
Higher intake on ﬁxed than self-titrated condition. 
Experiencing “high ” was lower in Sativex than SAU. 
Withdrawal scores decreased. 
No signiﬁcant craving scores. 
Decreased THC and higher CBD mean concentrations observed during both 
conditions. 
No serious adverse events. 
Trigo et al., 2016 [286] 
Cannabis 
Open-label trial, N = 4, 3-month 
self-titration phase, outpatient. 
Nabiximols (113.4 mg THC, 
105 mg CBD). 
Reduction of cannabis intake during intervention. 
No compensatory increases of other substances (tobacco, caﬀeine, alcohol). 
1 of 4 subjects achieved abstinence and remained during the study. 
Follow-up average cannabis use was 17.9% days/week vs. 92.9% at baseline. 
Trigo et al., 2016 [287] 
Cannabis 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 12, 
10-week, outpatient. 
Nabilone 2mg. 
Nabilone and placebo groups both self-reported use reduction. 
Medication deemed safe and tolerable. 
No serious adverse events. 
Hill et al., 2017 [285] 
Cannabis 
Open-label trial, N = 12, 6-day 
open-label cannabis-smoking 
phase. 
Bediol® (3.6% THC, 7.1% CBD) 
or Bedrobinol® (9.1% THC, 
< 0.2% CBD), smoked in 
cigarettes. 
Acceptance and appreciation of proposed cannabis, especially Bedrobinol for 
“stronger kick ”. 
No side eﬀects of smoking. 
No psychosis-like signs observed. 
Nausea and dizziness occasionally reported. 
No serious adverse events. 
van Amsterdam et al., 
2018 [288] 
Cannabis 
Randomized controlled trial, 
N = 40, 12-week, outpatient. 
Psychotherapy + Nabiximols 
(113.4 mg THC, 105 mg CBD). 
Decreased use in both groups. 
No abstinence score diﬀerences. 
No withdrawal scores diﬀerences. 
Craving scores showed time X treatment interaction. 
No serious adverse events. 
Trigo et al., 2018 [273] 
Cannabis 
Randomized controlled trial, 
N = 128, 12-week, outpatient. 
Psychotherapy + Nabiximols 
(88.4 mg THC, 80 mg CBD). 
Decreased days of use. 
Similar retention rates. 
Medication well tolerated. 
Comparable improvements in health status. 
No serious adverse events. 
Lintzeris et al., 2019 
[272] 
Opioids 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 12, 
5-week, inpatient. 
Dronabinol 5, 10, 20, 30 or 
40 mg + Oxycodone 30 mg or 
60mg. 
Higher doses of Dro (20, 30 and 40 mg) increased anxiety and heart rate. 
Dro 40 mg was not tolerated. 
Jicha et al., 2015 [279] 
Opioids 
Randomized experimental study 
(within-subject 
placebo-controlled), N = 12, 
5-week, inpatient. 
Dronabinol 5, 10, 20 or 
30 mg + Oxycodone 30 mg or 
60mg. 
VAS: Dro 30 mg produced “drug dose ” and liking" eﬀects, and dose x interaction for 
“high ”. 
Dro 20 and 30 mg suppressed opioid withdrawal scores and reduced ratings of 
symptoms (backache, feeling sick, muscular tension, runny or watery eyes, and 
rhinorrhea). 
Lofwall et al., 2016 
[280] 
Dro = Dronabinol; Nbx = Nabiximols; SAU = Smoking as Usual condition; VAS = Visual Analogue Scale; DSST: Digit Symbol Substitution Test. 
22 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
agonist, used as a concomitant pharmacological intervention in this 
RCT. Despite this exception, all of the interventions were well toler- 
ated, and no severe adverse events were reported. All studies reported 
either decrease of withdrawal symptoms severity [ 270 , 271 , 274 , 275 ] 
or reduction in substance use and craving [ 272 , 273 ], and all of the 
studies had psychotherapy sessions such as Relapse Prevention, Moti- 
vational Enhancement Therapy or Cognitive Behavioral Therapy as ad- 
ditional interventions. Ten randomized experimental studies are within- 
subject placebo-controlled trials - seven studies used dronabinol as main 
intervention [276–282] and three used Nabilone [283–285] . We also 
included one prospective pilot study using nabiximols [286] and two 
open-label trials [ 287 , 288 ]. 
Interventions for opioid users were composed of dronabinol and oxy- 
codone, a synthetic opioid [ 279 , 280 ]. Participants did not tolerate the 
highest dose (40 mg) of dronabinol [279] , but lower doses (20 mg and 
30 mg) suppressed opioid withdrawal scores and reduced ratings of 
symptoms like backache, nausea, lacrimation and rhinorrhea [280] . 
All other studies appraised cannabis users presenting patterns of 
CUD for their interventions. Haney et al. [278] proposed three medi- 
cation conditions for inpatient and outpatient settings in a laboratory 
model of relapse: dronabinol 60 mg, lofexidine 2.4 mg, and dronabi- 
nol together with lofexidine, at the same dosages. Dronabinol alone re- 
duced the severity of withdrawal symptoms such as anorexia, weight 
loss and sleep latency, and both lofexidine alone and dronabinol com- 
bined with lofexidine decreased cannabis self-administration. The other 
intervention with complementary pharmacotherapy was presented by 
Herrmann et al. [284] in which participants used nabilone (6 mg) and 
zolpidem (12.5 mg) or zolpidem alone at the same dosage in a labora- 
tory model of relapse. The combination of both medications signiﬁcantly 
decreased cannabis self-administration, reduced withdrawal severity, 
decreased disruptions in sleep, mood and food intake and decreased 
cannabis use while it did not alter cognitive performance. Hill et al. 
[285] used nabilone (2 mg) in a randomized prospective pilot study to 
assess safety, tolerability and eﬃcacy for cannabis users but did not re- 
port treatment eﬀects. Haney et al. [283] studied two doses of nabilone 
(6 mg or 8 mg) while participants also had access to smoked cannabis 
(5.6% Δ9 -THC). Both nabilone conditions reduced cannabis use during 
the intervention and continued to do so during the three-day follow- 
up, increased caloric intake and the number of hours slept, but reduced 
cognitive task performance on the Digit Symbol Substitution Test. Haney 
et al. [277] also had active smoked cannabis (3.04% Δ9 -THC) simultane- 
ously with cannabinoid-based medication in an inpatient and outpatient 
design in which authors presented two studies, one tested divalproex, a 
mood stabilizer, and the other 10 mg of dronabinol, which was consid- 
ered more eﬀective than the former for lowering cannabis withdrawal. 
The dronabinol group reported craving to smoke as “mild to moderate ”, 
as compared to “moderate to severe ” in the placebo condition, had no 
eﬀects on sleep ratings, and decreased performance on the Digit Symbol 
Substitution Test. 
Some studies proposed three diﬀerent conditions of intervention for 
participants: “smoking as usual ” (SAU), where they smoke cannabis at 
their usual rate; “ﬁxed ”, a constant, determined dose of a medication 
(i.e. , cannabinoids); and “self-titrated ”, in which the patient could use 
the medication whenever they want, with a determined maximum dose. 
Trigo et al. [286] demonstrated that nabiximols eﬀectively decreased 
withdrawal scores, and observed higher CBD than THC mean concen- 
tration in urinary and plasma assessments, and that there was a higher 
intake of cannabinoids during the ﬁxed rather than the self-titrated con- 
dition. Scores of experiencing “high ” were lower in both ﬁxed and self- 
titrated nabiximols than SAU conditions. Budney et al. [276] proposed 
ﬁve days of abstinence conditions with three doses of either 10, 30 or 
90 mg of dronabinol alternated with three SAU conditions lasting seven 
to nine days, and demonstrated reduction in withdrawal symptoms, sig- 
niﬁcant eﬀect on craving scores and sleep quality, and also an increase 
on body weight associated with dronabinol. Vandrev et al. [282] tested 
three doses of dronabinol (30, 60 and 120 mg), each dosage separated 
by nine days of SAU condition, and reported dose-dependent attenua- 
tion of cannabis withdrawal symptoms and a slight 3% less accurate 
cognitive performance during dronabinol conditions than placebo. We 
retrieved one study that assessed cue-elicited eﬀects of cannabis using 
a within-subject crossover design [281] , with 10 and 20 mg of dron- 
abinol, and it reports a decrease in “urge to smoke ”, desire to use and 
anxiety scores. Two open label studies are also worth mentioning. Trigo 
et al. [287] evaluated a self-titration phase of nabiximols associated with 
behavioral psychotherapy and reported a follow-up average cannabis 
use of 17.9% days/week vs. 92.9% at baseline. Finally, to our knowl- 
edge, the only open-label trial of a cannabis-smoking phase studying 
harm reduction strategies was conducted by van Amsterdam et al. 326 . 
Researchers proposed to 12 diagnosed schizophrenic patients that con- 
sumed high potency cannabis to substitute the cannabis of their choice 
with two selected cannabis chemovars: Bediol® (3.6% Δ9 -THC, 7.1% 
CBD) or Bedrobinol® (9.1% Δ9 -THC, < 0.2% CBD), and they attempted 
to assess appreciation and acceptance scores. Bedrobinol® had the high- 
est levels of appreciation and no psychosis-like signs were observed 
with either chemovar, suggesting that it is possible to develop speciﬁc 
chemovars to appraise users of high-potency cannabis and serve as a 
harm reduction strategy, although further research is needed. No seri- 
ous adverse events were reported in any of the aforementioned studies. 
In this session we discussed high quality studies focusing on THC, 
considering that it may be one of the main compounds responsible for 
the psychedelic eﬀects found in cannabis, though certainly minding 
the considerable diﬀerences between the isolated and even synthetic 
cannabinoid preparations and the entourage eﬀect promoted by the con- 
sumption of whole cannabis derivatives [ 289 , 290 ]. Most studies demon- 
strate that medications containing THC, alone or together with CBD, are 
eﬀective for attenuating withdrawal symptoms and reducing the con- 
sumption of cannabis, although positive results for opioid use were also 
observed. RCT with CBD, although not included in this review are also 
worth mentioning, as they present the prominent eﬀectiveness in cases 
of use of opioid, stimulants and cocaine addiction [291–294] . 
Notably, high quality RCT using cannabis in natura are still scarce, 
as it is still a Schedule-I substance that prevents the advance of clin- 
ical studies. Several cross-sectional and also high quality longitudinal 
studies (e.g. , Cunningham et al. [295] ; Socías et al. [296] ) are being 
conducted and are already providing consistent evidence aligned with 
RCT with isolated cannabinoids, that cannabis may be an alternative or 
complementary treatment for SUD, especially for OUD. However, the 
relation of complementarity and/or substitution with some substances 
(i.e. , alcohol) is still being observed [ 297 , 298 ]. 
Similarly to psychedelics, some cannabis chemovars, specially THC- 
predominant proﬁles, may induce transformative experiences [255] and 
may substitute more harmful drugs [299] , and although studies with 
isolated cannabinoids are advancing, higher quality studies using 
commercially-available, legally-obtained cannabis are necessary to un- 
derstand this eﬀects. As van Wel et al. [254] demonstrated in their 
study, experimenting with speciﬁcally selected chemovars may be an 
alternative to safely conduct high quality assessment and clinical stud- 
ies as our understanding of the biochemical properties of cannabis ad- 
vances [300] and we begin to tackle obstacles that isolated cannabinoids 
and the harms that uncontrolled high potency cannabis may present 
[ 301 , 302 ]. 
3.3. Online surveys and the use of micro dosing 
We found publications of cross-sectional studies based on anony- 
mous online surveys in which respondents self-report their experiences 
with various psychedelics, especially LSD and psilocybin, in non-clinical 
settings, as a strategy to cope with SUD. Such studies usually present 
results for all psychedelics included in the survey without clear speci- 
ﬁcations. Participants who used psychedelics reported decreases in the 
severity of withdrawal symptoms and craving, and cessation or reduc- 
tion of alcohol use [303] , cannabis, opioids and stimulants [304] . John- 
23 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
son et al. [305] gathered information from individuals who had “quit 
or reduced smoking after a psychedelic experience ”, and from a total 
of 358 participants, 38% reported quit smoking and 28% reported ex- 
pressive reductions on smoking rates after psychedelic use, while 34% 
relapsed after temporary smoking reduction. The diﬀerences between 
groups of all substances were signiﬁcant, with disadvantage for the re- 
lapse group. Lawn et al. [306] conducted a survey involving over 90,000 
respondents to analyze well-being measures, harmful alcohol consump- 
tion and acute subjective substance eﬀects in past-year ayahuasca users. 
The study reported greater well-being rates among ayahuasca users 
when compared to other classic psychedelics users (mainly LSD) and 
non-psychedelics substance-using respondents. Ayahuasca users also re- 
ported less harmful drinking than other classic psychedelic users, al- 
though these two groups reported greater harmful drinking than the 
non-psychedelics substance-using group. In another online survey with 
individuals who used various psychedelics at microdoses as a form of 
therapy, Lea et al. [307] found that 39% of respondents reported men- 
tal health or substance use problems as their primary motivations to use 
psychedelics. Improvement of mental health aspects were reported by 
44% of all respondents and minor improvements by 35.8%, along with 
partial reduction of some medication and non-medical substance use. 
Another study observed self-reported improvement in psychiatric con- 
ditions, AUD and SUD by respondents who took mescaline in natural- 
istic context, and reported that these improvements were signiﬁcantly 
associated with higher ratings of acute psychological factors including 
mystical-type experience and psychological insights [127] . 
Anonymous online surveys are a useful tool to gather information 
about use of psychedelics without the costs and bureaucracy of a con- 
trolled study. However, this type of study presents important limitations. 
Participant selection might exclude those who have tried psychedelics 
as an alternative treatment but got negative results; recall bias may lead 
to inaccurate responses; volunteer bias favors the report of positive out- 
comes; there is no access to the exact dosage used, their source and pu- 
rity; many uncontrolled variables regarding the set and setting, which 
greatly inﬂuence the experience; and the absence of a control group. 
Microdosing has been growing as another modality of psychedelics 
consumption among individuals dealing with mental health issues, and 
researchers are starting to investigate more about it. The placebo ef- 
fect might also inﬂuence the results, as shown by Szigeti et al. [308] in 
a ‘self-blind’ trial in which participants were given online instructions 
on how to incorporate placebo control into their microdosing routine 
without clinical supervision. The results showed signiﬁcant improve- 
ment for both the microdosing and the placebo groups, but no signiﬁ- 
cant between-groups diﬀerences. 
3.4. Limitations and reﬂections 
This review aimed to discuss the therapeutic potential of classic and 
non-classic psychedelics for SUD. It is worth mentioning that although 
numerous, the quality of studies is still not standardized. For instance, 
while there are several clinical studies with LSD conducted in the years 
1950–1970, most studies had no control groups or employed statisti- 
cal analysis, while a few recent studies with psilocybin, ketamine and 
cannabis preparations adopted more rigid experimental designs. On the 
other hand, this is not a systematic review, and we did not employ sta- 
tistical methods to evaluate the data. We must declare that despite our 
eﬀort to search by clinical studies published with psychedelics and SUD, 
occasionally some studies were not available in the databases searched. 
Also, papers that the full text could not be obtained or published in other 
languages were not included. 
Another important limitation refers to the methodological classiﬁca- 
tion of the studies. The methods and experimental design of the papers 
were carefully examined in order to classify the type of study using con- 
temporary scientiﬁc terminology (see Box 1 ). However, most of early 
studies do not ﬁt in such classiﬁcation. Indeed, clinical studies with 
psychedelics have some important particularities: First, psychedelics are 
controlled substances, most of them on schedule I, which makes the ap- 
proval of clinical protocols more diﬃcult. Double blind studies are diﬃ- 
cult to be designed because these substances produce evident psychoac- 
tive eﬀects, so many researchers have employed an active placebo (usu- 
ally another psychoactive substance or lower doses of the psychedelic 
under evaluation), but even following these protocols there is no guar- 
antee of blinding, especially if the participant had a previous experience 
with the psychedelic and is familiar with the eﬀects [309] . 
We also would like to point out some possible limitations in the ex- 
perimental design of clinical studies. Several articles do not describe in 
detail information about the experimental design, such as randomiza- 
tion, allocation and blinding procedures. Several studies did not clearly 
report the dose, route of administration, time of treatment and exper- 
imental N. Most studies evaluated the outcomes for short periods (a 
few weeks or months) and some follow-up measures were mainly ac- 
cessed by phone and reached only a small number of participants. In 
some studies, diﬀerent attention was given for experimental and con- 
trol participants in the follow-ups. Also, the criteria of inclusion and 
exclusion of participants is critical for the obtained results. It is well 
known that individuals looking for treatment are more likely to succeed 
than participants not interested in treatment, and are more likely to re- 
port improvement in subjective scales, which may lead to selection bias 
[ 2 , 310 , 311 ]. Muthukumaraswamy et al. [312] alert that high levels of 
response expectancy by participants may favorably interfere in the re- 
sults of clinical studies and suggest that RCT with psychedelics should 
routinely measure de-blinding (unblinding) and expectancy. Mertens & 
Preller [309] also warn for the possibility of a nocebo eﬀect in patients 
that realize they received the placebo or active placebo and became 
disappointed, which could produce negative responses. Finally, it is im- 
portant to keep in mind that self-reported evaluations are subjected to 
individuals’ mood and are diﬃcult to conﬁrm. All these limitations sug- 
gest that the clinical results described here must be taken with prudence. 
Other important limitations are discussed in some opinion reviews and 
systematic reviews [ 28 , 29 , 31 , 33 , 36 , 309 , 313–316 ]. 
3.5. Main remarks and future directions 
The treatment of SUD is very complex, and the results of pharmaco- 
logical interventions are limited, with high relapse rates. Because heavy 
drug use may cause signiﬁcant personal and social burdens, any treat- 
ment capable of potentially reducing the use of such substances de- 
serves attention. Psychedelic substances have always aroused the inter- 
est of the scientiﬁc community, with several recent studies focusing on 
the investigation of their therapeutic potential for mental health disor- 
ders and SUD. Research on Psychedelic-assisted Therapy for SUD seem 
promising, especially for decreasing substance use, increase abstinence 
time and decrease the number of days of heavy use. Some psychedelics 
have demonstrated fast and long-lasting satisfactory eﬀects with small 
to moderate doses, while other studies suggest that higher doses induc- 
ing mystical experience are necessary to produce the therapeutic eﬀect. 
Also, some works suggest that repeated administration seems more ef- 
fective to obtain perdurable eﬀects. As noted [28] , although the long- 
lasting eﬀects may be very satisfactory for many patients, more work 
needs to be conducted to understand in which situation re-dosing would 
be desirable, for example, for patients in risk of relapsing. 
Another important aspect of discussion is that psychedelic therapy 
frequently associates psychedelic use and one or more psychotherapy 
sessions. There is strong evidence that psychotherapy per se can re- 
sult in beneﬁcial outcomes for SUD, and the eﬃcacy of the psychedelic 
treatment without therapeutic interventions is still a matter of debate. 
It seems that the association of psychedelic treatment and psychother- 
apy is the norm in most studies, but there are reports of people who 
use psychedelics without therapeutic supervision as a strategy to cope 
with SUD. The set and setting also seems to be fundamental inﬂuence 
on studies outcomes. Andersen et al. [28] report that some studies that 
24 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
neglected the therapeutic setting and support generally failed to ﬁnd 
positive eﬀects. 
Despite all the problems related to SUD, it is intriguing that the ad- 
herence to the current treatments is still low; consequently, it is im- 
portant to open possibilities beyond our standard repertoire of treat- 
ment modalities. Recently, in vivo and in vitro studies have shown that 
psychedelics, including DMT, LSD, and ketamine can robustly increase 
neuritogenesis and/or spinogenesis, mechanisms that are important for 
neuronal plasticity and are related to SUD behavior [ 30 , 317 ]. It was sug- 
gested that psychedelics allow the reorganization of disordered neural 
pathways in the default mode network and also attenuate maladaptive 
signaling in mesolimbic reward pathway [31] . More preclinical studies 
are necessary to evaluate the molecular basis of each psychedelic mech- 
anism of action, as well as robust clinical studies with large samples 
to conﬁrm the potential of psychedelics for SUD. Additionally, there is 
great potential in the use of psychedelics as part of a therapeutic strat- 
egy to cope with comorbidities associated with SUD such as depression, 
anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disor- 
der [ 23 , 35 , 76 , 107 , 163 , 318 ] which should also involve adequate thera- 
peutic support. Future clinical studies should always include the most 
suitable control groups and strategies to guarantee high quality study 
designs, with validated scales and instruments, appropriated follow-ups 
and rigorous statistical analysis. 
In conclusion, clinical studies suggest that ketamine may be eﬀective 
for AUD, reduction of cocaine craving and management of opiate with- 
drawal, and preliminary studies indicate that psilocybin may be eﬀec- 
tive for AUD and tobacco use disorder. THC and other oral cannabinoid 
preparations seem to be eﬀective for CUD and possibly OUD, while ibo- 
gaine, used in detoxiﬁcation clinics, seems useful to avoid withdrawal 
symptoms and craving mainly for opioids, alcohol and cocaine. Based 
on observational studies, the use of ayahuasca in ritual context seems 
to help individuals to cope with SUD. However, current literature does 
not support the use of LSD for SUD and there are no controlled clinical 
studies with mescaline, MDMA and salvinorin A for SUD. Importantly, 
in most controlled clinical studies, the beneﬁcial eﬀects observed were 
partial and temporary and some sort of psychotherapy seems to be nec- 
essary. 
Funding 
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agen- 
cies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors. 
Box 1 . Glossary for clinical, experimental and observational stud- 
ies. 
Between-subjects design — A design of intervention in which 
diﬀerent participants are exposed to a single condition (i.e. , Group 
A takes medication, Group B takes placebo). 
Case reports — Studies that report the development of a case 
registered by the authors. Usually involves a small number of par- 
ticipants and presents only a descriptive analysis. 
Clinical trial — Studies conducted with humans to evaluate 
a medical condition. Usually controlled with placebo with a ran- 
domized sample. 
Cross-sectional — A type of design of observational studies in 
which data from a population is analyzed at a speciﬁc time point, 
used for surveys assessing the prevalence of a condition (i.e. , drug 
use self-report from residents of a country). 
Fixed condition — A condition in which participants take 
their medication (or placebo) at a ﬁxed dose, (i.e. , three puﬀs from 
a spray in the morning, three in the evening). 
Inpatient — Studies in which participants must spend at least 
one night properly accommodated in a hospital or clinical setting. 
Longitudinal — A type of design of observational studies in 
which data is collected over a period of time from the same sub- 
jects, to detect changes in characteristics of a targeted population 
(i.e. , eﬀects of ﬁve years of alcohol use in men). 
Observational studies — Studies that are not experimental 
and provide qualitative evidence. 
Open label trial — A type of design of study in which both 
participants and research team are aware of the intervention and 
no placebo is used. 
Outpatient — Studies in which participants do not spend the 
night in the hospital, clinical or laboratory setting and are dis- 
missed on the same day, returning for additional scheduled en- 
counters. 
Prospective pilot study — A preliminary study investigating 
the feasibility of an intervention, usually preceding the conduction 
of a Randomized Controlled Trial. 
Randomized Controlled Trial — A type of design of clinical 
trials that follows controlled guidelines to prevent several forms 
of bias, and are double blinded, that is, both participants and re- 
search team are blinded to conditions and outcomes tested with a 
control group, in a between-subjects design. 
Randomized Experimental Study — Studies composed with 
a main pharmacological intervention, randomized but not neces- 
sarily with placebo blinding control. 
Self-titrated condition — A condition in which participants 
take their medication (or placebo) as they wish, usually with a 
determined maximum dose (i.e. , puﬀs from a spray, maximum of 
10 puﬀs a day). 
Smoking as Usual condition — A condition in which partic- 
ipants are asked to smoke at their usual rate, usually to establish 
a baseline condition of smoking before intervention. 
Systematic Review — A reproducible method of review of 
a formulated question, following the ‘PICO’ format (Population, 
Intervention, Comparison and Outcomes) to assess the quality of 
Randomized Controlled Trials and compile high quality data in 
order to provide a Meta Analysis on a subject. 
Within-subjects design — A design of intervention in which 
the same participant is exposed to all the conditions (i.e. , all par- 
ticipants take medication and placebo). 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
None. 
Supplementary materials 
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 
the online version, at doi: 10.1016/j.addicn.2022.100025 . 
References 
[1] American Psychiatric AssociationDiagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental dis- 
orders: DSM-5, 5th ed, American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C, 2013 . 
[2] United Nations publicationWorld Drug Report 2021, Oﬃce on Drugs and Crime, 
UN, 2021 www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/wdr2021.html (accessed 
September 9, 2021) . 
[3] GBD risk factors collaborators, global, regional, and national comparative 
risk assessment of 79 behavioural, environmental and occupational, and 
metabolic risks or clusters of risks, 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the 
global burden of disease study 2015, The Lancet 388 (2016) 1659–1724, 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31679-8 . 
[4] World 
Health 
OrganizationGlobal 
Status 
Report 
On 
Alcohol 
and 
Health 
2018, 
World 
Health 
Organization, 
Geneva, 
2018 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/274603 (accessed January 3, 2022) . 
[5] N.D. Volkow, M. Michaelides, R. Baler, The neuroscience of drug reward and ad- 
diction, Physiol. Rev. 99 (2019) 2115–2140, doi: 10.1152/physrev.00014.2018 . 
[6] D.M. Tomkins, E.M. Sellers, Addiction and the brain: the role of neurotransmitters 
in the cause and treatment of drug dependence, CMAJ Can. Med. Assoc. J. J. Assoc. 
Medicale Can. 164 (2001) 817–821 . 
[7] J.D. Salamone, M. Correa, The mysterious motivational functions of mesolimbic 
dopamine, Neuron 76 (2012) 470–485, doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.021 . 
[8] G. Di Chiara, Nucleus accumbens shell and core dopamine: diﬀerential 
role in behavior and addiction, Behav. Brain Res. 137 (2002) 75–114, 
doi: 10.1016/S0166-4328(02)00286-3 . 
25 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
[9] N.D. Volkow, M. Boyle, Neuroscience of addiction: relevance to pre- 
vention and treatment, Am. J. Psychiatry. 175 (2018) 729–740, 
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2018.17101174 . 
[10] T.W. Robbins, K.D. Ersche, B.J. Everitt, Drug addiction and the memory systems of 
the brain, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1141 (2008) 1–21, doi: 10.1196/annals.1441.020 . 
[11] G.F. Koob, Drug addiction, dysregulation of reward, and allostasis, Neuropsy- 
chopharmacology 24 (2001) 97–129, doi: 10.1016/S0893-133X(00)00195-0 . 
[12] H.S. Connery, R.K. McHugh, M. Reilly, S. Shin, S.F. Greenﬁeld, Substance use disor- 
ders in global mental health delivery: epidemiology, treatment gap, and implemen- 
tation of evidence-based treatments, Harv. Rev. Psychiatry. 28 (2020) 316–327, 
doi: 10.1097/HRP.0000000000000271 . 
[13] S. Sudheesh, S.N.N. Gowda, Recent advancements in treatment and pre- 
vention of substance use disorders, Innov. J. Nurs. Healthc. 6 (2020) 4, 
doi: 10.31690/ijnh.2020.v06i04.002 . 
[14] H.C. Karoly, S.L. YorkWilliams, K.E. Hutchison, Clinical neuroscience of addiction: 
similarities and diﬀerences between alcohol and other drugs, Alcohol. Clin. Exp. 
Res. 39 (2015) 2073–2084, doi: 10.1111/acer.12884 . 
[15] E.A. Carlini, L.O. Maia, Plant and fungal hallucinogens as toxic and ther- 
apeutic agents, in: P. Gopalakrishnakone, C.R. Carlini, R. Ligabue-Braun 
(Eds.), Plant Toxins, Springer, Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2015, pp. 1–44, 
doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-6728-7_6-1 . 
[16] E.L. Konrath, M.D. Arbo, B.D. Arbo, M.A. Hort, E. Elisabetsky, M.B. Leal, Plants 
with anti-addictive potential, in: G.E. Barreto, A. Sahebkar (Eds.), Pharmacol. Prop. 
Plant-Deriv. Nat. Prod. Implic. Hum. Health, Springer International Publishing, 
Cham, 2021, pp. 185–215, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-64872-5_14 . 
[17] F.R. Mendes, J.M. Duarte-Almeida, R. Tabach, E.A. Carlini, The action of plants and 
their constituents on the central nervous system, in: V. Cechinel-Filho (Ed.), Plant 
Bioact. Drug Discov, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2012, pp. 161–
204, doi: 10.1002/9781118260005.ch5 . 
[18] R.E. Schultes, A. Hofmann, C. Rätsch, Plants of the gods: Their sacred, healing, and 
Hallucinogenic Powers, Healing Arts Press, Rochester, Vt, 2001 Rev. and expanded 
ed . 
[19] D.E. 
Nichols, 
Psychedelics, 
Pharmacol. 
Rev. 
68 
(2016) 
264–355, 
doi: 10.1124/pr.115.011478 . 
[20] D.E. Nichols, Dark classics in chemical neuroscience: lysergic acid diethy- 
lamide (LSD), ACS Chem. Neurosci 9 (2018) 2331–2343, doi: 10.1021/acschem- 
neuro.8b00043 . 
[21] D.E. Nichols, C.D. Nichols, The pharmacology of pscychedelics, in: C.S. Grob, 
J. Grigsby (Eds.), Handb. Med. Hallucinog., The Guilford Press, New York, NY, 
2021 . 
[22] K.H. Preller, F.X. Vollenweider, Phenomenology, structure, and dynamic of 
psychedelic states, in: A.L. Halberstadt, F.X. Vollenweider, D.E. Nichols (Eds.), Be- 
hav. Neurobiol. Psychedelic Drugs, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2016, pp. 221–256, doi: 10.1007/7854_2016_459 . 
[23] A. Garcia-Romeu, B. Kersgaard, P.H. Addy, Clinical applications of hal- 
lucinogens: a review, Exp. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 24 (2016) 229–268, 
doi: 10.1037/pha0000084 . 
[24] R.G. Pertwee, Cannabinoid pharmacology: the ﬁrst 66 years: cannabinoid pharma- 
cology, Br. J. Pharmacol. 147 (2006) S163–S171, doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0706406 . 
[25] M.H. Keeler, J.A. Ewing, B.A. Rouse, Hallucinogenic eﬀects of marijuana as cur- 
rently used, Am. J. Psychiatry. 128 (1971) 213–216, doi: 10.1176/ajp.128.2.213 . 
[26] S.J. Belouin, J.E. Henningﬁeld, Psychedelics: where we are now, why 
we got here, what we must do, Neuropharmacology 142 (2018) 7–19, 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.02.018 . 
[27] A. Hintzen, T. Passie, The Pharmacology of LSD: a Critical Review, Oxford Univer- 
sity Press : Beckley Foundation Press, Oxford, 2010 . 
[28] K.A.A. Andersen, R. Carhart-Harris, D.J. Nutt, D. Erritzoe, Therapeutic eﬀects of 
classic serotonergic psychedelics: a systematic review of modern-era clinical stud- 
ies, Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 143 (2021) 101–118, doi: 10.1111/acps.13249 . 
[29] R.L. Carhart-Harris, G.M. Goodwin, The therapeutic potential of psychedelic 
drugs: past, present, and future, Neuropsychopharmacology 42 (2017) 2105–2113, 
doi: 10.1038/npp.2017.84 . 
[30] D. De Gregorio, A. Aguilar-Valles, K.H. Preller, B.D. Heifets, M. Hibicke, 
J. Mitchell, G. Gobbi, Hallucinogens in mental health: preclinical and clinical stud- 
ies on LSD, psilocybin, MDMA, and ketamine, J. Neurosci. 41 (2021) 891–900, 
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1659-20.2020 . 
[31] A.J. DiVito, R.F. Leger, Psychedelics as an emerging novel intervention in the treat- 
ment of substance use disorder: a review, Mol. Biol. Rep. 47 (2020) 9791–9799, 
doi: 10.1007/s11033-020-06009-x . 
[32] M.W. Johnson, P.S. Hendricks, F.S. Barrett, R.R. Griﬃths, Classic psychedelics: 
an integrative review of epidemiology, therapeutics, mystical experi- 
ence, and brain network function, Pharmacol. Ther. 197 (2019) 83–102, 
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.11.010 . 
[33] C.J.A. Morgan, A. McAndrew, T. Stevens, D. Nutt, W. Lawn, Tripping up addic- 
tion: the use of psychedelic drugs in the treatment of problematic drug and al- 
cohol use, Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 13 (2017) 71–76, doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2016. 
10.009 . 
[34] E.E. Schenberg, Psychedelic drugs as new tools in psychiatric therapeutics, Braz. J. 
Psychiatry. 43 (2021) 121–122, doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2020-0012 . 
[35] V.D. Wiltenburg, D. da Rocha Prado, F.R. Mendes, Therapeutic use of hallucino- 
gens, in: D. De Micheli, A.L.M. Andrade, R.A. Reichert, E.A. da Silva, B. de O. Pin- 
heiro, F.M. Lopes (Eds.), Drugs Hum. Behav., Springer International Publishing, 
Cham, 2021, pp. 479–510, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-62855-0_35 . 
[36] M. Winkelman, Psychedelics as medicines for substance abuse rehabilitation: eval- 
uating treatments with LSD, Peyote, Ibogaine and Ayahuasca, Curr. Drug Abuse 
Rev. 7 (2014) 101–116, doi: 10.2174/1874473708666150107120011 . 
[37] G.F. Koob, Neurobiology of addiction, Focus (Madison) 9 (2011) 55–65, 
doi: 10.1176/foc.9.1.foc55 . 
[38] M.R. Bruchas, B.B. Land, C. Chavkin, The dynorphin/kappa opioid system as a 
modulator of stress-induced and pro-addictive behaviors, Brain Res 1314 (2010) 
44–55, doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.08.062 . 
[39] M.D. Scoﬁeld, J.A. Heinsbroek, C.D. Gipson, Y.M. Kupchik, S. Spencer, 
A.C.W. Smith, D. Roberts-Wolfe, P.W. Kalivas, The nucleus accumbens: mecha- 
nisms of addiction across drug classes reﬂect the importance of glutamate home- 
ostasis, Pharmacol. Rev. 68 (2016) 816–871, doi: 10.1124/pr.116.012484 . 
[40] D. Jiao, Y. liu, X. Li, J. liu, M. Zhao, The role of the GABA system in amphetamine- 
type stimulant use disorders, Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9 (2015), doi: 10.3389/fn- 
cel.2015.00162 . 
[41] M.R. Mitchell, K.C. Berridge, S.V. Mahler, Endocannabinoid-enhanced “liking ”
in nucleus accumbens shell hedonic hotspot requires endogenous opioid signals, 
Cannabis Cannabinoid Res 3 (2018) 166–170, doi: 10.1089/can.2018.0021 . 
[42] A. Garcia-Romeu, W.A. Richards, Current perspectives on psychedelic therapy: use 
of serotonergic hallucinogens in clinical interventions, Int. Rev. Psychiatry. 30 
(2018) 291–316, doi: 10.1080/09540261.2018.1486289 . 
[43] A. Hofmann, How LSD originated, J. Psychedelic Drugs. 11 (1979) 53–60, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.1979.10472092 . 
[44] A. Hofmann, LSD, My Problem Child, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1980 . 
[45] T. Passie, J.H. Halpern, D.O. Stichtenoth, H.M. Emrich, A. Hintzen, The pharmacol- 
ogy of lysergic acid diethylamide: a review, CNS Neurosci. Ther. 14 (2008) 295–
314, doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5949.2008.00059.x . 
[46] K. Von Hungen, S. Roberts, D.F. Hill, LSD as an agonist and antagonist at central 
dopamine receptors, Nature 252 (1974) 588–589, doi: 10.1038/252588a0 . 
[47] V.J. Watts, R.B. Mailman, C.P. Lawler, K.A. Neve, D.E. Nichols, LSD and structural 
analogs: pharmacological evaluation at D1 dopamine receptors, Psychopharmacol- 
ogy (Berl.) 118 (1995) 401–409, doi: 10.1007/BF02245940 . 
[48] E. Dyck, Hitting highs at rock bottom’: LSD treatment for alcoholism, 1950–1970, 
Soc. Hist. Med. 19 (2006) 313–329, doi: 10.1093/shm/hkl039 . 
[49] N. Chwelos, D.B. Blewett, C.M. Smith, A. Hoﬀer, Use of d-lysergic acid diethy- 
lamide in the treatment of alcoholism, Q. J. Stud. Alcohol. 20 (1959) 577–590, 
doi: 10.15288/qjsa.1959.20.577 . 
[50] C.M. Smith, A new adjunct to the treatment of alcoholism: the hallucinogenic drugs, 
Q. J. Stud. Alcohol. 19 (1958) 406–417, doi: 10.15288/qjsa.1958.19.406 . 
[51] S.E. Jensen, A treatment program for alcoholics in a mental hospital, Q. J. Stud. 
Alcohol. 23 (1962) 315–320, doi: 10.15288/qjsa.1962.23.315 . 
[52] J.R. MacLean, D.C. MacDonald, U.P. Byrne, A.M. Hubbard, The use of LSD-25 in 
the treatment of alcoholism and other psychiatric problems, Q. J. Stud. Alcohol. 
22 (1961) 34–45, doi: 10.15288/qjsa.1961.22.034 . 
[53] P.O. O’Reilly, A. Funk, LSD in chronic alcoholism, Can. Psychiatr. Assoc. J. 9 (1964) 
258–261, doi: 10.1177/070674376400900311 . 
[54] P.O. O’Reilly, G. Reich, Lysergic acid and the alcoholic, Dis. Nerv. Syst. 23 (1962) 
331–334 . 
[55] A.L. Chandler, M.A. Hartman, Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25) as a facilitating 
agent in psychotherapy, Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 2 (1960) 286, doi: 10.1001/arch- 
psyc.1960.03590090042008 . 
[56] S.E. Jensen, R. Ramsay, Treatment of chronic alcoholism with lyser- 
gic acid diethylamide, Can. Psychiatr. Assoc. J. 8 (1963) 182–188, 
doi: 10.1177/070674376300800305 . 
[57] A.A. Kurland, S. Unger, J.W. Shaﬀer, C. Savage, Psychedelic therapy utilizing LSD 
in the treatment of the alcoholic patient: a preliminary report, Am. J. Psychiatry. 
123 (1967) 1202–1209, doi: 10.1176/ajp.123.10.1202 . 
[58] F.E. Cheek, H. Osmond, M. Sarett, R.S. Albahary, Observations regarding the use 
of LSD-25 in the treatment of alcoholism, obs. use LSD-25 treat, Alcohol (1966) 
56–74 . 
[59] W.V. Dusen, W. Wilson, W. Miners, H. Hook, Treatment of alcoholism with ly- 
sergide, Q. J. Stud. Alcohol. 28 (1967) 295–304, doi: 10.15288/qjsa.1967.28.295 . 
[60] R. Denson, D. Sydiaha, A controlled study of LSD treatment in alcoholism and 
neurosis, Br. J. Psychiatry. 116 (1970) 443–445, doi: 10.1192/bjp.116.533.443 . 
[61] R.G. Smart, T. Storm, E.F.W. Baker, L. Solursh, A controlled study of lysergide in 
the treatment of alcoholism. the eﬀects on drinking behavior, Q. J. Stud. Alcohol. 
27 (1966) 469–482, doi: 10.15288/qjsa.1966.27.469 . 
[62] L.E. Hollister, J. Shelton, G. Krieger, A controlled comparison of lysergic acid di- 
ethylamide (LSD) and dextroamphetamine in alcoholics, Am. J. Psychiatry. 125 
(1969) 1352–1357, doi: 10.1176/ajp.125.10.1352 . 
[63] F.G. Johnson, LSD in the treatment of alcoholism, Am. J. Psychiatry. 126 (1969) 
481–487, doi: 10.1176/ajp.126.4.481 . 
[64] W.T. Bowen, R.A. Soskin, J.W. Chotlos, Lysergic acid diethylamide as a variable 
in the hospital treatment of alcoholism: a follow-up study, J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 150 
(1970) 111–118, doi: 10.1097/00005053-197002000-00003 . 
[65] A.A. Kurland, C. Savage, W.N. Pahnke, S. Grof, J.E. Olsson, LSD in the treatment 
of alcoholics, Pharmacopsychiatry 4 (1971) 83–94, doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1094301 . 
[66] A. Ludwig, J. Levine, L. Stark, R. Lazar, A clinical study of LSD treatment in alco- 
holism, Am. J. Psychiatry. 126 (1969) 59–69, doi: 10.1176/ajp.126.1.59 . 
[67] M. Tomsovic, R.V. Edwards, Lysergide treatment of schizophrenic and non- 
schizophrenic alcoholics; a controlled evaluation, Q. J. Stud. Alcohol. 31 (1970) 
932–949, doi: 10.15288/qjsa.1970.31.932 . 
[68] C. Savage, O.L. McCabe, Residential psychedelic (LSD) therapy for the narcotic ad- 
dict: a controlled study, Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 28 (1973) 808, doi: 10.1001/arch- 
psyc.1973.01750360040005 . 
[69] K.R. Alper, B. Dong, R. Shah, H. Sershen, K.Y. Vinod, LSD administered as a single 
dose reduces alcohol consumption in C57BL/6 J Mice, Front. Pharmacol. 9 (2018) 
994, doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00994 . 
26 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
[70] M.W. Meinhardt, C. Güngör, I. Skorodumov, L.J. Mertens, R. Spanagel, Psilocybin 
and LSD have no long-lasting eﬀects in an animal model of alcohol relapse, Neu- 
ropsychopharmacology 45 (2020) 1316–1322, doi: 10.1038/s41386-020-0694-z . 
[71] D.J. McKenna, J. Riba, New world tryptamine hallucinogens and the neuroscience 
of Ayahuasca, in: A.L. Halberstadt, F.X. Vollenweider, D.E. Nichols (Eds.), Be- 
hav. Neurobiol. Psychedelic Drugs, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2016, pp. 283–311, doi: 10.1007/7854_2016_472 . 
[72] J.C. Callaway, L.P. Raymon, W.L. Hearn, D.J. McKenna, C.S. Grob, G.S. Brito, 
D.C. Mash, Quantitation of N,N-dimethyltryptamine and harmala alkaloids in hu- 
man plasma after oral dosing with Ayahuasca, J. Anal. Toxicol. 20 (1996) 492–497, 
doi: 10.1093/jat/20.6.492 . 
[73] C.S. Grob, D.J. McKENNA, J.C. Callaway, G.S. Brito, E.S. Neves, G. Ober- 
laender, O.L. Saide, E. Labigalini, C. Tacla, C.T. Miranda, R.J. Strassman, 
K.B. Boone, Human psychopharmacology of hoasca, a plant hallucinogen 
used in ritual context in Brazil, J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 184 (1996) 86–94, 
doi: 10.1097/00005053-199602000-00004 . 
[74] L. Speranza, J. Labus, F. Volpicelli, D. Guseva, E. Lacivita, M. Leopoldo, G.C. Bel- 
lenchi, U. di Porzio, M. Bijata, C. Perrone-Capano, E. Ponimaskin, Serotonin 5-HT7 
receptor increases the density of dendritic spines and facilitates synaptogenesis in 
forebrain neurons, J. Neurochem. 141 (2017) 647–661, doi: 10.1111/jnc.13962 . 
[75] J.C. Bouso, D. González, S. Fondevila, M. Cutchet, X. Fernández, P.C. Ribeiro Bar- 
bosa, M.Á. Alcázar-Córcoles, W.S. Araújo, M.J. Barbanoj, J.M. Fábregas, J. Riba, 
Personality, psychopathology, life attitudes and neuropsychological performance 
among ritual users of ayahuasca: a longitudinal study, PLoS ONE 7 (2012) e42421, 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042421 . 
[76] R.G. dos Santos, J.E.C. Hallak, Therapeutic use of serotoninergic hallucinogens: 
a review of the evidence and of the biological and psychological mechanisms, 
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 108 (2020) 423–434, doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019. 
12.001 . 
[77] D.J. McKenna, J.C. Callaway, C.S. Grob, The scientiﬁc investigation of ayahuasca: a 
review of past and current research, Heﬀter Rev. Psychedelic Res. 1 (1998) 65–76 . 
[78] R.G. dos Santos, M. Valle, J.C. Bouso, J.F. Nomdedéu, J. Rodríguez- 
Espinosa, E.H. McIlhenny, S.A. Barker, M.J. Barbanoj, J. Riba, Autonomic, 
neuroendocrine, and immunological eﬀects of ayahuasca: a comparative 
study with d-amphetamine, J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 31 (2011) 717–726, 
doi: 10.1097/JCP.0b013e31823607f6 . 
[79] D.J. McKenna, G.H.N. Towers, F. Abbott, Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
in South American hallucinogenic plants: tryptamine and 𝛽-carboline 
constituents of Ayahuasca, J. Ethnopharmacol. 10 (1984) 195–223, 
doi: 10.1016/0378-8741(84)90003-5 . 
[80] E.Jr. Labigalini, O Uso De Ayahuasca em Um Contexto Religioso Por Ex- 
Dependentes De álcool, Dissertação de Mestrado, Universidade Federal de São 
Paulo/Escola Paulista de Medicina, área de concentração Saúde Mental., 1998 
https://repositorio.unifesp.br/handle/11600/18894 . 
[81] P.C.R. Barbosa, L.F. Tófoli, M.P. Bogenschutz, R. Hoy, L.F. Berro, E.A.V. Mar- 
inho, K.N. Areco, M.J. Winkelman, Assessment of alcohol and tobacco use dis- 
orders among religious users of ayahuasca, Front. Psychiatry. 9 (2018) 136, 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00136 . 
[82] D. Perkins, E.S. Opaleye, H. Simonova, J.C. Bouso, L.F. Tófoli, N.L. GalvÃo-Coelho, 
V. Schubert, J. Sarris, Associations between ayahuasca consumption in naturalistic 
settings and current alcohol and drug use: results of a large international cross- 
sectional survey, Drug Alcohol Rev (2021) dar.13348, doi: 10.1111/dar.13348 . 
[83] J.M. Fábregas, D. González, S. Fondevila, M. Cutchet, X. Fernández, P.C.R. Barbosa, 
M.Á. Alcázar-Córcoles, M.J. Barbanoj, J. Riba, J.C. Bouso, Assessment of addiction 
severity among ritual users of ayahuasca, Drug Alcohol Depend 111 (2010) 257–
261, doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.03.024 . 
[84] E. Doering-Silveira, C.S. Grob, M.D. de Rios, E. Lopez, L.K. Alonso, C. Tacla, 
D.X. Da Silveira, Report on psychoactive drug use among adolescents using 
ayahuasca within a religious context, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 37 (2005) 141–144, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.2005.10399794 . 
[85] G. Thomas, P. Lucas, N. Capler, K. Tupper, G. Martin, Ayahuasca-assisted therapy 
for addiction: results from a preliminary observational study in Canada, Curr. Drug 
Abuse Rev. 6 (2013) 30–42, doi: 10.2174/15733998113099990003 . 
[86] E. Argento, R. Capler, G. Thomas, P. Lucas, K.W. Tupper, Exploring ayahuasca- 
assisted therapy for addiction: a qualitative analysis of preliminary ﬁndings among 
an Indigenous community in Canada, Drug Alcohol Rev 38 (2019) 781–789, 
doi: 10.1111/dar.12985 . 
[87] M.S. Mercante, A ayahuasca e o tratamento da dependência, Mana 19 (2013) 529–
558, doi: 10.1590/S0104-93132013000300005 . 
[88] I.E. Apud Peláez, Ayahuasca en el tratamiento de adicciones: estudio de cuatro ca- 
sos tratados en IDEAA, desde una perspectiva interdisciplinaria, Interdisciplinaria 
36 (2019) 133–154 . 
[89] I.E. Apud Peláez, Personality traits in former spanish substance users re- 
covered with Ayahuasca, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 52 (2020) 264–272, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.2020.1752960 . 
[90] J.I. Cruz, S.A. Nappo, Is Ayahuasca an option for the treatment of 
crack cocaine dependence? J. Psychoactive Drugs. 50 (2018) 247–255, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.2018.1447174 . 
[91] D.M. O’Shaughnessy, I. Berlowitz, R. Rodd, Z. Sarnyai, F. Quirk, Within- 
treatment changes in a novel addiction treatment program using traditional Ama- 
zonian medicine, Ther. Adv. Psychopharmacol. 11 (2021) 204512532098663, 
doi: 10.1177/2045125320986634 . 
[92] I. Berlowitz, H. Walt, C. Ghasarian, F. Mendive, C. Martin-Soelch, Short- 
term treatment eﬀects of a substance use disorder therapy involving tra- 
ditional amazonian medicine, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 51 (2019) 323–334, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.2019.1607956 . 
[93] A. Loizaga-Velder, R. Verres, Therapeutic eﬀects of ritual ayahuasca use in the 
treatment of substance dependence —qualitative results, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 46 
(2014) 63–72, doi: 10.1080/02791072.2013.873157 . 
[94] A.J. Oliveira-Lima, R. Santos, A.W. Hollais, C.A. Gerardi-Junior, M.A. Bal- 
daia, R. Wuo-Silva, T.S. Yokoyama, J.L. Costa, E.L.A. Malpezzi-Marinho, 
P.C. Ribeiro-Barbosa, L.F. Berro, R. Frussa-Filho, E.A.V. Marinho, Eﬀects of 
ayahuasca on the development of ethanol-induced behavioral sensitization and 
on a post-sensitization treatment in mice, Physiol. Behav. 142 (2015) 28–36, 
doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.01.032 . 
[95] C.A.F. Almeida, A.A. Pereira-Junior, J.G. Rangel, B.P. Pereira, K.C.M. Costa, 
V. Bruno, G.O. Silveira, C.S. Ceron, M. Yonamine, R. Camarini, R.C.T. Garcia, 
T. Marcourakis, L.H. Torres, Ayahuasca, a psychedelic beverage, modulates neu- 
roplasticity induced by ethanol in mice, Behav. Brain Res. 416 (2021) 113546, 
doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113546 . 
[96] E.G. Cata-Preta, Y.A. Serra, E. da C. Moreira-Junior, H.S. Reis, N.D. Kisaki, 
M. Libarino-Santos, R.R.R. Silva, T. Barros-Santos, L.C. Santos, P.C.R. Barbosa, 
J.L. Costa, A.J. Oliveira-Lima, L.F. Berro, E.A.V. Marinho, Ayahuasca and its DMT- 
and 𝛽-carbolines – containing ingredients block the expression of ethanol-induced 
conditioned place preference in mice: role of the treatment environment, Front. 
Pharmacol. 9 (2018) 561, doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00561 . 
[97] B. Gianfratti, R. Tabach, M.E. Sakalem, T. Stessuk, L.O. Maia, E.A. Car- 
lini, Ayahuasca blocks ethanol preference in an animal model of depen- 
dence and shows no acute toxicity, J. Ethnopharmacol. 285 (2022) 114865, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2021.114865 . 
[98] L.M. Nolli, D.G.R. de Oliveira, S.S. Alves, M.V. von Zuben, A. Pic-Taylor, M.R. Mor- 
tari, E.D. Caldas, Eﬀects of the hallucinogenic beverage ayahuasca on voluntary 
ethanol intake by rats and on cFos expression in brain areas relevant to drug ad- 
diction, Alcohol 84 (2020) 67–75, doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2019.10.005 . 
[99] A.F. Godinho, M.C. Silva, J.D. Kawashima, D.F. Horta, F. Anselmo, D. De Fraia, 
Ayahuasca modiﬁes amphetamine self ingestion and modiﬁes anxiety and locomo- 
tor activity in adolescent rats, Electron. J. Biol. 13 (2017) 159–165 . 
[100] H.S. Reis, I.R.S. Rodrigues, A. Anjos-Santos, M. Libarino-Santos, Y.A. Serra, 
E.G. Cata-Preta, D. Oliveira-Campos, N.D. Kisaki, T. Barros-Santos, T.S. Yokoyama, 
F.C. Cruz, A.J. Oliveira-Lima, P.C.R. Barbosa, L.F. Berro, E.A.V. Marinho, 
Ayahuasca blocks the reinstatement of methylphenidate-induced conditioned place 
preference in mice: behavioral and brain Fos expression evaluations, Psychophar- 
macology (Berl.) 237 (2020) 3269–3281, doi: 10.1007/s00213-020-05609-6 . 
[101] V. Bruno, Ayahuasca No Tratamento Da Farmacodependência à cocaína: Possíveis 
Intervenções Terapêuticas?, Mestrado em Toxicologia, Universidade de São Paulo, 
2019, doi: 10.11606/D.9.2019.tde-09122019-185108 . 
[102] M. Politi, F. Friso, G. Saucedo, J. Torres, Traditional use of Banisteriopsis caapi alone 
and its application in a context of drug addiction therapy, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 
53 (2021) 76–84, doi: 10.1080/02791072.2020.1820641 . 
[103] B. Rush, O. Marcus, S. García, A. Loizaga-Velder, G. Loewinger, A. Spitalier, 
F. Mendive, Protocol for outcome evaluation of ayahuasca-assisted addiction 
treatment: the case of takiwasi center, Front. Pharmacol. 12 (2021) 659644, 
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.659644 . 
[104] F. Tyl š , T. Páleníček, J. Horáček, Psilocybin –
Summary of knowledge 
and new perspectives, Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 24 (2014) 342–356, 
doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.12.006 . 
[105] J. Daniel, M. Haberman, Clinical potential of psilocybin as a treat- 
ment for mental health conditions, Ment. Health Clin. 7 (2017) 24–28, 
doi: 10.9740/mhc.2017.01.024 . 
[106] T.S. Ray, Psychedelics and the human receptorome, PLoS ONE 5 (2010) e9019, 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009019 . 
[107] M.W. Johnson, R.R. Griﬃths, Potential therapeutic eﬀects of psilocybin, Neurother- 
apeutics 14 (2017) 734–740, doi: 10.1007/s13311-017-0542-y . 
[108] B.T.H. de Veen, A.F.A. Schellekens, M.M.M. Verheij, J.R. Homberg, Psilocybin 
for treating substance use disorders? Expert Rev. Neurother. 17 (2017) 203–212, 
doi: 10.1080/14737175.2016.1220834 . 
[109] M.W. Johnson, A. Garcia-Romeu, M.P. Cosimano, R.R. Griﬃths, Pilot study of the 5- 
HT R agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction, J. Psychopharmacol. 
(Oxf.). 28 (2014) 983–992, doi: 10.1177/0269881114548296 . 
[110] M.W. Johnson, A. Garcia-Romeu, R.R. Griﬃths, Long-term follow-up of psilocybin- 
facilitated smoking cessation, Am. J. Drug Alcohol Abuse. 43 (2017) 55–60, 
doi: 10.3109/00952990.2016.1170135 . 
[111] T. Noorani, A. Garcia-Romeu, T.C. Swift, R.R. Griﬃths, M.W. Johnson, Psychedelic 
therapy for smoking cessation: qualitative analysis of participant accounts, J. Psy- 
chopharmacol. (Oxf.). 32 (2018) 756–769, doi: 10.1177/0269881118780612 . 
[112] M.P. Bogenschutz, A.A. Forcehimes, J.A. Pommy, C.E. Wilcox, Pcr. Bar- 
bosa, R.J. Strassman, Psilocybin-assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: 
a proof-of-concept study, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 29 (2015) 289–299, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881114565144 . 
[113] E.M. Nielson, D.G. May, A.A. Forcehimes, M.P. Bogenschutz, The psychedelic 
debrieﬁng in alcohol dependence treatment: illustrating key change phenomena 
through qualitative content analysis of clinical sessions, Front. Pharmacol. 9 (2018) 
132, doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00132 . 
[114] M.P. Bogenschutz, S.K. Podrebarac, J.H. Duane, S.S. Amegadzie, T.C. Malone, 
L.T. Owens, S. Ross, S.E. Mennenga, Clinical interpretations of patient experience 
in a trial of psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy for alcohol use disorder, Front. Phar- 
macol. 9 (2018) 100, doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00100 . 
[115] R.R. Griﬃths, W.A. Richards, U. McCann, R. Jesse, Psilocybin can occasion 
mystical-type experiences having substantial and sustained personal meaning 
and spiritual signiﬁcance, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 187 (2006) 268–283, 
doi: 10.1007/s00213-006-0457-5 . 
27 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
[116] F.S. Barrett, S.R. Krimmel, R.R. Griﬃths, D.A. Seminowicz, B.N. Mathur, Psilocybin 
acutely alters the functional connectivity of the claustrum with brain networks 
that support perception, memory, and attention, Neuroimage 218 (2020) 116980, 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116980 . 
[117] M.K. Madsen, P.M. Fisher, D.S. Stenbæk, S. Kristiansen, D. Burmester, S. Lehel, 
T. Páleníček, M. Kucha ř , C. Svarer, B. Ozenne, G.M. Knudsen, A single psilocybin 
dose is associated with long-term increased mindfulness, preceded by a propor- 
tional change in neocortical 5-HT2A receptor binding, Eur. Neuropsychopharma- 
col. 33 (2020) 71–80, doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2020.02.001 . 
[118] K.H. Preller, P. Duerler, J.B. Burt, J.L. Ji, B. Adkinson, P. Stämpﬂi, E. Seifritz, 
G. Repov š , J.H. Krystal, J.D. Murray, A. Anticevic, F.X. Vollenweider, Psilocybin 
induces time-dependent changes in global functional connectivity, Biol. Psychiatry. 
88 (2020) 197–207, doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.12.027 . 
[119] M.F. Olive, Peyote and Mescaline, Chelsea House, New York, 2007 . 
[120] B.K. Cassels, P. Sáez-Briones, Dark classics in chemical neuroscience: mescaline, 
ACS Chem. Neurosci. 9 (2018) 2448–2458, doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00215 . 
[121] R.J. Dinis-Oliveira, C.L. Pereira, D.D. da Silva, Pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic 
aspects 
of 
peyote 
and 
mescaline: 
clinical 
and 
forensic repercussions, Curr. Mol. Pharmacol. 12 (2019) 184–194, 
doi: 10.2174/1874467211666181010154139 . 
[122] T. Páleníček, M. Balíková, V. Bubeníková-Vale š ová, J. Horáček, Mescaline ef- 
fects on rat behavior and its time proﬁle in serum and brain tissue after 
a single subcutaneous dose, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 196 (2008) 51–62, 
doi: 10.1007/s00213-007-0926-5 . 
[123] B.J. Albaugh, P.O. Anderson, Peyote in the treatment of alcoholism 
among american indians, Am. J. Psychiatry. 131 (1974) 1247–1250, 
doi: 10.1176/ajp.131.11.1247 . 
[124] J.F. Garrity, Peyote Jesus, the Holy People, Alcohol abuse and the ethos 
of power in navajo healing, Med. Anthropol. Q. 14 (2000) 521–542, 
doi: 10.1525/maq.2000.14.4.521 . 
[125] P. Pascarosa, S. Futterman, M. Halsweig, Observations of alcoholics in the 
peyote ritual: a pilot study, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 273 (1976) 518–524, 
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1976.tb52923.x . 
[126] K. Blum, S.F.L. Futterman, P. Pascarosa, Peyote, a potential ethnopharmacologic 
agent for alcoholism and other drug dependencies: possible biochemical rationale, 
Clin. Toxicol. 11 (1977) 459–472, doi: 10.3109/15563657708988210 . 
[127] G. Agin-Liebes, T.F. Haas, R. Lancelotta, M.V. Uthaug, J.G. Ramaekers, A.K. Davis, 
Naturalistic use of mescaline is associated with self-reported psychiatric improve- 
ments and enduring positive life changes, ACS Pharmacol. Transl. Sci. 4 (2021) 
543–552, doi: 10.1021/acsptsci.1c00018 . 
[128] J.M. Corkery, Ibogaine as a treatment for substance misuse: poten- 
tial beneﬁts and practical dangers, Prog. Brain Res. (2018) 217–257, 
doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2018.08.005 . 
[129] A. Landrin, De L’Iboga Et de L’Ibogaine, Kessinger Publishing, Whiteﬁsh, Montana, 
1905 . 
[130] K.R. Alper, Chapter 1 Ibogaine: a review, in: Alkaloids Chem. Biol., Elsevier, 2001, 
pp. 1–38, doi: 10.1016/S0099-9598(01)56005-8 . 
[131] T. Brown, Ibogaine in the Treatment of Substance Dependence, Curr. Drug Abuse 
Rev. 6 (2013) 3–16, doi: 10.2174/15672050113109990001 . 
[132] M.J. Wasko, P.A. Witt-Enderby, C.K. Surratt, DARK classics in chemical neuro- 
science: ibogaine, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 9 (2018) 2475–2483, doi: 10.1021/ac- 
schemneuro.8b00294 . 
[133] R.G. dos Santos, J.C. Bouso, J.E.C. Hallak, The antiaddictive eﬀects of ibogaine: a 
systematic literature review of human studies, J. Psychedelic Stud. 1 (2017) 20–28, 
doi: 10.1556/2054.01.2016.001 . 
[134] D.-.Y. He, N.N.H. McGough, A. Ravindranathan, J. Jeanblanc, M.L. Logrip, 
K. Phamluong, P.H. Janak, D. Ron, Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor me- 
diates the desirable actions of the anti-addiction drug ibogaine against alcohol con- 
sumption, J. Neurosci. 25 (2005) 619, doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3959-04.2005 . 
[135] S. Marton, B. González, S. Rodríguez-Bottero, E. Miquel, L. Martínez-Palma, M. Pa- 
zos, J.P. Prieto, P. Rodríguez, D. Sames, G. Seoane, C. Scorza, P. Cassina, I. Carrera, 
Ibogaine administration modiﬁes GDNF and BDNF expression in brain regions in- 
volved in mesocorticolimbic and nigral dopaminergic circuits, Front. Pharmacol. 
10 (2019) 193, doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.00193 . 
[136] S. Carnicella, D.-.Y. He, Q.V. Yowell, S.D. Glick, D. Ron, Noribogaine, but not 
18-MC, exhibits similar actions as ibogaine on GDNF expression and ethanol self- 
administration: ibogaine derivatives and GDNF and alcohol, Addict. Biol. 15 (2010) 
424–433, doi: 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2010.00251.x . 
[137] A.H. Rezvani, D.H. Overstreet, Y.-.W. Leef, Attenuation of alcohol intake by Ibo- 
gaine in three strains of alcohol-preferring rats, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 52 
(1995) 615–620, doi: 10.1016/0091-3057(95)00152-M . 
[138] S.D. Glick, M.E. Kuehne, J. Raucci, T.E. Wilson, D. Larson, R.W. Keller, J.N. Carl- 
son, Eﬀects of iboga alkaloids on morphine and cocaine self-administration 
in rats: relationship to tremorigenic eﬀects and to eﬀects on dopamine re- 
lease in nucleus accumbens and striatum, Brain Res 657 (1994) 14–22, 
doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(94)90948-2 . 
[139] S.D. Glick, K. Rossman, S. Steindorf, I.M. Maisonneuve, J.N. Carlson, Eﬀects and 
aftereﬀects of ibogaine on morphine self-administration in rats, Eur. J. Pharmacol. 
195 (1991) 341–345, doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(91)90474-5 . 
[140] M.B. Leal, K. Michelin, D.O. Souza, E. Elisabetsky, Ibogaine attenuation of 
morphine withdrawal in mice: role of glutamate N-methyl-d-aspartate re- 
ceptors, Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry. 27 (2003) 781–785, 
doi: 10.1016/S0278-5846(03)00109-X . 
[141] I. Moroz, L.A. Parker, S. Siegel, Ibogaine interferes with the establishment of am- 
phetamine place preference learning, Exp. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 5 (1997) 119–
122, doi: 10.1037/1064-1297.5.2.119 . 
[142] L.A. Parker, S. Siegel, T. Luxton, Ibogaine attenuates morphine-induced con- 
ditioned place preference, Exp. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 3 (1995) 344–348, 
doi: 10.1037/1064-1297.3.4.344 . 
[143] K.R. Alper, H.S. Lotsof, G.M.N. Frenken, D.J. Luciano, J. Bastiaans, Treatment 
of acute opioid withdrawal with Ibogaine, Am. J. Addict. 8 (1999) 234–242, 
doi: 10.1080/105504999305848 . 
[144] D.C. Mash, C.A. Kovera, J. Pablo, R. Tyndale, F.R. Ervin, J.D. Kamlet, W.Lee Hearn, 
Chapter 8 Ibogaine in the treatment of heroin withdrawal, Alkaloids Chem. Biol. 
(2001) 155–171, doi: 10.1016/S0099-9598(01)56012-5 . 
[145] B.J. Malcolm, M. Polanco, J.P. Barsuglia, Changes in withdrawal and craving scores 
in participants undergoing opioid detoxiﬁcation utilizing ibogaine, J. Psychoactive 
Drugs. 50 (2018) 256–265, doi: 10.1080/02791072.2018.1447175 . 
[146] D.C. Mash, L. Duque, B. Page, K. Allen-Ferdinand, Ibogaine detoxiﬁcation tran- 
sitions opioid and cocaine abusers between dependence and abstinence: clin- 
ical observations and treatment outcomes, Front. Pharmacol. 9 (2018) 529, 
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00529 . 
[147] E.E. Schenberg, M.A. de Castro Comis, B.R. Chaves, D.X. da Silveira, Treating drug 
dependence with the aid of ibogaine: a retrospective study, J. Psychopharmacol. 
(Oxf.). 28 (2014) 993–1000, doi: 10.1177/0269881114552713 . 
[148] P. Glue, G. Cape, D. Tunnicliﬀ, M. Lockhart, F. Lam, N. Hung, C.T. Hung, S. Harland, 
J. Devane, R.S. Crockett, J. Howes, B. Darpo, M. Zhou, H. Weis, L. Friedhoﬀ, As- 
cending single-dose, double-blind, placebo-controlled safety study of noribogaine 
in opioid-dependent patients: clinical pharmacology in drug development, Clin. 
Pharmacol. Drug Dev. 5 (2016) 460–468, doi: 10.1002/cpdd.254 . 
[149] S.D. Glick, S.M. Pearl, J. Cai, I.M. Maisonneuve, Ibogaine-like eﬀects of noribogaine 
in rats, Brain Res 713 (1996) 294–297, doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(95)01563-9 . 
[150] D.C. Mash, B. Ameer, D. Prou, J.F. Howes, E.L. Maillet, Oral noribogaine 
shows high brain uptake and anti-withdrawal eﬀects not associated with 
place preference in rodents, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 30 (2016) 688–697, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881116641331 . 
[151] Q. Chang, T. Hanania, D.C. Mash, E.L. Maillet, Noribogaine reduces nicotine 
self-administration in rats, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 29 (2015) 704–711, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881115584461 . 
[152] S.D. Glick, I.M. Maisonneuve, K.K. Szumlinski, 18-Methoxycoronaridine 
(18-MC) and Ibogaine: comparison of antiaddictive eﬃcacy, toxicity, 
and mechanisms of action, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 914 (2000) 369–386, 
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb05211.x . 
[153] A.H. Rezvani, M.C. Cauley, S. Slade, C. Wells, S. Glick, J.E. Rose, E.D. Levin, Acute 
oral 18-methoxycoronaridine (18-MC) decreases both alcohol intake and IV nico- 
tine self-administration in rats, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 150–151 (2016) 153–
157, doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2016.10.010 . 
[154] C.N. Miller, C. Ruggery, H.M. Kamens, The 𝛼3 𝛽4 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
antagonist 18-methoxycoronaridine decreases binge-like ethanol consumption in 
adult C57BL/6 J mice, Alcohol 79 (2019) 1–6, doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2018.11.006 . 
[155] L.P. Cameron, R.J. Tombari, J. Lu, A.J. Pell, Z.Q. Hurley, Y. Ehinger, M.V. Vargas, 
M.N. McCarroll, J.C. Taylor, D. Myers-Turnbull, T. Liu, B. Yaghoobi, L.J. Laskowski, 
E.I. Anderson, G. Zhang, J. Viswanathan, B.M. Brown, M. Tjia, L.E. Dunlap, 
Z.T. Rabow, O. Fiehn, H. Wulﬀ, J.D. McCorvy, P.J. Lein, D. Kokel, D. Ron, J. Peters, 
Y. Zuo, D.E. Olson, A non-hallucinogenic psychedelic analogue with therapeutic 
potential, Nature 589 (2021) 474–479, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-3008-z . 
[156] M.M. Gassaway, T.L. Jacques, A.C. Kruegel, R.J. Karpowicz, X. Li, S. Li, Y. Myer, 
D. Sames, Deconstructing the Iboga alkaloid skeleton: potentiation of FGF2-induced 
glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor release by a novel compound, ACS Chem. 
Biol. 11 (2016) 77–87, doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00678 . 
[157] E.F. Domino, History and pharmacology of PCP and PCP-related analogs, J. 
Psychedelic Drugs. 12 (1980) 223–227, doi: 10.1080/02791072.1980.10471430 . 
[158] M.W. Tyler, H.B. Yourish, D.F. Ionescu, S.J. Haggarty, Classics in chemical neu- 
roscience: ketamine, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 8 (2017) 1122–1134, doi: 10.1021/ac- 
schemneuro.7b00074 . 
[159] I. Ezquerra-Romano, W. Lawn, E. Krupitsky, C.J.A. Morgan, Ketamine for the treat- 
ment of addiction: evidence and potential mechanisms, Neuropharmacology 142 
(2018) 72–82, doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.01.017 . 
[160] C.E. Strong, M. Kabbaj, Neural mechanisms underlying the rewarding and thera- 
peutic eﬀects of ketamine as a treatment for alcohol use disorder, Front. Behav. 
Neurosci. 14 (2020) 593860, doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2020.593860 . 
[161] M.A. Peltoniemi, N.M. Hagelberg, K.T. Olkkola, T.I. Saari, Ketamine: a review of 
clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in anesthesia and pain therapy, 
Clin. Pharmacokinet. 55 (2016) 1059–1077, doi: 10.1007/s40262-016-0383-6 . 
[162] J.W. Murrough, A.M. Perez, S. Pillemer, J. Stern, M.K. Parides, M. aan 
het Rot, K.A. Collins, S.J. Mathew, D.S. Charney, D.V. Iosifescu, Rapid 
and longer-term antidepressant eﬀects of repeated ketamine infusions in 
treatment-resistant major depression, Biol. Psychiatry. 74 (2013) 250–256, 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.06.022 . 
[163] C.G. Abdallah, G. Sanacora, R.S. Duman, J.H. Krystal, Ketamine and rapid-acting 
antidepressants: a window into a new neurobiology for mood disorder therapeutics, 
Annu. Rev. Med. 66 (2015) 509–523, doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-053013-062946 . 
[164] J.L. Phillips, S. Norris, J. Talbot, T. Hatchard, A. Ortiz, M. Birmingham, O. Owo- 
eye, L.A. Batten, P. Blier, Single and repeated ketamine infusions for reduction of 
suicidal ideation in treatment-resistant depression, Neuropsychopharmacology 45 
(2020) 606–612, doi: 10.1038/s41386-019-0570-x . 
[165] D. Voineskos, Z.J. Daskalakis, D.M. Blumberger, Management of treatment- 
resistant depression: challenges and strategies, Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 16 
(2020) 221–234, doi: 10.2147/NDT.S198774 . 
[166] S.E. Strasburger, P.M. Bhimani, J.H. Kaabe, J.T. Krysiak, D.L. Nanchanatt, 
T.N. Nguyen, K.A. Pough, T.A. Prince, N.S. Ramsey, K.H. Savsani, L. Scandlen, 
M.J. Cavaretta, R.B. Raﬀa, What is the mechanism of ketamine’s rapid-onset an- 
28 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
tidepressant eﬀect? A concise overview of the surprisingly large number of possi- 
bilities, J. Clin. Pharm. Ther. 42 (2017) 147–154, doi: 10.1111/jcpt.12497 . 
[167] E.M. Krupitsky, A.Y. Grineko, T.N. Berkaliev, A.I. Paley, U.N. Tetrov, K.A. Mushkov, 
Y.S. Borodikin, The combination of psychedelic and aversive approaches in al- 
coholism treatment: the aﬀective contra-attribution method, Alcohol. Treat. Q. 9 
(1992) 99–105, doi: 10.1300/J020V09N01_09 . 
[168] E.M. Krupitsky, A.Y. Grinenko, Ketamine psychedelic therapy (KPT): a review of 
the results of ten years of research, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 29 (1997) 165–183, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.1997.10400185 . 
[169] E.M. Krupitsky, Ketamine psychedelic therapy (KPT) of alcoholism and neurosis, 
Multidiscip Assoc Psychedelic Stud Newsl 3 (1992) 24–28 . 
[170] E. Kolp, H.L. Friedman, M.S. Young, E. Krupitsky, Ketamine enhanced psychother- 
apy: preliminary clinical observations on its eﬀectiveness in treating alcoholism, 
Humanist. Psychol. 34 (2006) 399–422, doi: 10.1207/s15473333thp3404_7 . 
[171] G. Yoon, I.L. Petrakis, J.H. Krystal, Association of combined naltrexone and ke- 
tamine with depressive symptoms in a case series of patients with depression and 
alcohol use disorder, JAMA Psychiatry 76 (2019) 337, doi: 10.1001/jamapsychia- 
try.2018.3990 . 
[172] E. Dakwar, F. Levin, C.L. Hart, C. Basaraba, J. Choi, M. Pavlicova, E.V. Nunes, 
A single ketamine infusion combined with motivational enhancement therapy for 
alcohol use disorder: a randomized midazolam-controlled pilot trial, Am. J. Psy- 
chiatry. 177 (2020) 125–133, doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2019.19070684 . 
[173] R.L. Rothberg, N. Azhari, N.A. Haug, E. Dakwar, Mystical-type experiences oc- 
casioned by ketamine mediate its impact on at-risk drinking: results from a 
randomized, controlled trial, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 35 (2021) 150–158, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881120970879 . 
[174] A. McAndrew, W. Lawn, T. Stevens, L. Porﬀy, B. Brandner, C.J.A. Morgan, A proof- 
of-concept investigation into ketamine as a pharmacological treatment for alcohol 
dependence: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial, Trials 18 (2017) 159, 
doi: 10.1186/s13063-017-1895-6 . 
[175] O.M. Mollaahmetoglu, J. Keeler, K.J. Ashbullby, E. Ketzitzidou-Argyri, M. Grab- 
ski, C.J.A. Morgan, This is something that changed my life ”: a qualitative study 
of patients’ experiences in a clinical trial of ketamine treatment for alcohol use 
disorders, Front. Psychiatry. 12 (2021) 695335, doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.695335 . 
[176] R.K. Das, G. Gale, K. Walsh, V.E. Hennessy, G. Iskandar, L.A. Mordecai, B. Brandner, 
M. Kindt, H.V. Curran, S.K. Kamboj, Ketamine can reduce harmful drinking by 
pharmacologically rewriting drinking memories, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 5187, 
doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13162-w . 
[177] S.D. Worrell, T.J. Gould, Therapeutic potential of ketamine for al- 
cohol use disorder, Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 126 (2021) 573–589, 
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.05.006 . 
[178] A. Wong, N.J. Benedict, M.J. Armahizer, S.L. Kane-Gill, Evaluation of adjunctive 
ketamine to benzodiazepines for management of alcohol withdrawal syndrome, 
Ann. Pharmacother. 49 (2015) 14–19, doi: 10.1177/1060028014555859 . 
[179] P. Shah, M. McDowell, R. Ebisu, T. Hanif, T. Toerne, Adjunctive use of ketamine for 
benzodiazepine-resistant severe alcohol withdrawal: a retrospective evaluation, J. 
Med. Toxicol. 14 (2018) 229–236, doi: 10.1007/s13181-018-0662-8 . 
[180] A.F. Pizon, M.J. Lynch, N.J. Benedict, J.H. Yanta, A. Frisch, N.B. Menke, 
G.S. Swartzentruber, A.M. King, M.G. Abesamis, S.L. Kane-Gill, Adjunct ketamine 
use in the management of severe ethanol withdrawal, Crit. Care Med. 46 (2018) 
e768–e771, doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000003204 . 
[181] J.H. Krystal, I.L. Petrakis, D. Limoncelli, E. Webb, R. Gueorgueva, D.C. D’Souza, 
N.N. Boutros, L. Trevisan, D.S. Charney, Altered NMDA glutamate receptor antag- 
onist response in recovering ethanol-dependent patients, Neuropsychopharmacol- 
ogy 28 (2003) 2020–2028, doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300252 . 
[182] E. Dakwar, F. Levin, R.W. Foltin, E.V. Nunes, C.L. Hart, The eﬀects of sub- 
anesthetic ketamine infusions on motivation to quit and cue-induced craving 
in cocaine-dependent research volunteers, Biol. Psychiatry. 76 (2014) 40–46, 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.08.009 . 
[183] E. Dakwar, C. Anerella, C.L. Hart, F.R. Levin, S.J. Mathew, E.V. Nunes, Therapeutic 
infusions of ketamine: do the psychoactive eﬀects matter? Drug Alcohol Depend 
136 (2014) 153–157, doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.12.019 . 
[184] E. Dakwar, C.L. Hart, F.R. Levin, E.V. Nunes, R.W. Foltin, Cocaine self- 
administration disrupted by the N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor antagonist ke- 
tamine: a randomized, crossover trial, Mol. Psychiatry. 22 (2017) 76–81, 
doi: 10.1038/mp.2016.39 . 
[185] E. Dakwar, E.V. Nunes, C.L. Hart, M.C. Hu, R.W. Foltin, F.R. Levin, A sub-set of psy- 
choactive eﬀects may be critical to the behavioral impact of ketamine on cocaine 
use disorder: results from a randomized, controlled laboratory study, Neurophar- 
macology 142 (2018) 270–276, doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.01.005 . 
[186] E. Dakwar, E.V. Nunes, C.L. Hart, R.W. Foltin, S.J. Mathew, K.M. Carpenter, 
C.J. “Jean ” Choi, C.N. Basaraba, M. Pavlicova, F.R. Levin, A single ketamine in- 
fusion combined with mindfulness-based behavioral modiﬁcation to treat cocaine 
dependence: a randomized clinical trial, Am. J. Psychiatry. 176 (2019) 923–930, 
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2019.18101123 . 
[187] E.M. Krupitsky, A. Burakov, T. Romanova, I. Dunaevsky, R. Strassman, 
A. Grinenko, Ketamine psychotherapy for heroin addiction: immediate ef- 
fects and two-year follow-up, J. Subst. Abuse Treat. 23 (2002) 273–283, 
doi: 10.1016/S0740-5472(02)00275-1 . 
[188] E.M. Krupitsky, A.M. Burakov, I.V. Dunaevsky, T.N. Romanova, T.Y. Slavina, 
A.Y. Grinenko, Single versus repeated sessions of ketamine-assisted psychother- 
apy for people with heroin dependence, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 39 (2007) 13–19, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.2007.10399860 . 
[189] T. Jovaisa, G. Laurinenas, S. Vosylius, J. Sipylaite, R. Badaras, J. Ivaskevicius, 
Eﬀects of ketamine on precipitated opiate withdrawal, Med. Kaunas. 42 (2006) 
625–634 . 
[190] L. Lalanne, C. Nicot, J.-.P. Lang, G. Bertschy, E. Salvat, Experience of the use of 
Ketamine to manage opioid withdrawal in an addicted woman: a case report, BMC 
Psychiatry 16 (2016) 395, doi: 10.1186/s12888-016-1112-2 . 
[191] S. Omoigui, F. Hashmat, Z. Bernardo, Use of ketamine in ameliorating opioid with- 
drawal symptoms during an induction phase of buprenorphine, Open Pain J 4 
(2011) 1–3, doi: 10.2174/1876386301104010001 . 
[192] B. Pradhan, G. Rossi, Combining ketamine, brain stimulation (rTMS) and mind- 
fulness therapy (TIMBER) for opioid addiction, Cureus 12 (2020) e11798, 
doi: 10.7759/cureus.11798 . 
[193] N. Azhari, H. Hu, K.Y. O’Malley, M.E. Blocker, F.R. Levin, E. Dakwar, 
Ketamine-facilitated behavioral treatment for cannabis use disorder: a 
proof of concept study, Am. J. Drug Alcohol Abuse. 47 (2021) 92–97, 
doi: 10.1080/00952990.2020.1808982 . 
[194] V. Sabino, A.R. Narayan, T. Zeric, L. Steardo, P. Cottone, mTOR acti- 
vation is required for the anti-alcohol eﬀect of ketamine, but not me- 
mantine, in alcohol-preferring rats, Behav. Brain Res. 247 (2013) 9–16, 
doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.02.030 . 
[195] A.H. Rezvani, Y. Tizabi, S. Slade, B. Getachew, E.D. Levin, Sub-anesthetic doses of 
ketamine attenuate nicotine self-administration in rats, Neurosci. Lett. 668 (2018) 
98–102, doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2018.01.022 . 
[196] D. Franco, J. Zamudio, K.M. Blevins, E.A. Núñez-Larios, U.M. Ricoy, S.D. Iñiguez, 
A.R. Zavala, Early-life ketamine exposure attenuates the preference for ethanol 
in adolescent Sprague-Dawley rats, Behav. Brain Res. 389 (2020) 112626, 
doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2020.112626 . 
[197] J.J.L. Fuller, R.C. Murray, K.A. Horner, d -amphetamine withdrawal-induced 
decreases in brain-derived neurotrophic factor in sprague-dawley rats are re- 
versed by treatment with ketamine, Neuropharmacology 97 (2015) 7–17, 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.04.023 . 
[198] I. Garcia-Carachure, F.J. Flores-Ramirez, S.A. Castillo, A. Themann, M.A. Areni- 
var, J. Preciado-Piña, A.R. Zavala, M.K. Lobo, S.D. Iñiguez, Enduring eﬀects of 
adolescent ketamine exposure on cocaine- and sucrose-induced reward in male 
and female C57BL/6 mice, Neuropsychopharmacology 45 (2020) 1536–1544, 
doi: 10.1038/s41386-020-0654-7 . 
[199] J.M. Witkin, J. Kranzler, K. Kaniecki, P. Popik, J.L. Smith, K. Hashimoto, J. Sporn, 
R-( − )-ketamine modiﬁes behavioral eﬀects of morphine predicting eﬃcacy as a 
novel therapy for opioid use disorder, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 194 (2020) 
172927, doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2020.172927 . 
[200] G. McKendrick, H. Garrett, H.E. Jones, D.S. McDevitt, S. Sharma, Y. Silber- 
man, N.M. Graziane, Ketamine blocks morphine-induced conditioned place pref- 
erence and anxiety-like behaviors in mice, Front. Behav. Neurosci. 14 (2020) 75, 
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2020.00075 . 
[201] L. Chang, K. Zhang, Y. Pu, Y. Qu, S. Wang, Z. Xiong, Q. Ren, C. Dong, Y. Fu- 
jita, K. Hashimoto, Comparison of antidepressant and side eﬀects in mice after 
intranasal administration of (R,S)-ketamine, (R)-ketamine, and (S)-ketamine, Phar- 
macol. Biochem. Behav. 181 (2019) 53–59, doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2019.04.008 . 
[202] K. Hashimoto, Rapid-acting antidepressant ketamine, its metabolites and other can- 
didates: a historical overview and future perspective, Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 73 
(2019) 613–627, doi: 10.1111/pcn.12902 . 
[203] L.E. Dunlap, A.M. Andrews, D.E. Olson, Dark classics in chemical neuroscience: 
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 9 (2018) 2408–2427, 
doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00155 . 
[204] T. Passie, U. Benzenhöfer, The history of MDMA as an underground drug 
in the United States, 1960–1979, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 48 (2016) 67–75, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.2015.1128580 . 
[205] A.R. Green, A.O. Mechan, J.M. Elliott, E. O’Shea, M.I. Colado, The pharmacology 
and clinical pharmacology of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, “Ec- 
stasy ”), Pharmacol. Rev. 55 (2003) 463–508, doi: 10.1124/pr.55.3.3 . 
[206] C. Michael White, How MDMA’s pharmacology and pharmacokinetics drive desired 
eﬀects and harms: the journal of clinical pharmacology, J. Clin. Pharmacol. 54 
(2014) 245–252, doi: 10.1002/jcph.266 . 
[207] E. Papaseit, C. Pérez-Mañá, M. Torrens, A. Farré, L. Poyatos, O. Hladun, 
A. Sanvisens, R. Muga, M. Farré, MDMA interactions with pharmaceuticals 
and drugs of abuse, Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 16 (2020) 357–369, 
doi: 10.1080/17425255.2020.1749262 . 
[208] G. Greer, R. Tolbert, Subjective reports of the eﬀects of MDMA 
in a clinical setting, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 18 (1986) 319–327, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.1986.10472364 . 
[209] B. Sessa, Why MDMA therapy for alcohol use disorder? And why now? Neurophar- 
macology 142 (2018) 83–88, doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.11.004 . 
[210] L. Jerome, S. Schuster, B. Yazar-Klosinski, Can MDMA play a role in the 
treatment of substance abuse? Curr. Drug Abuse Rev. 6 (2013) 54–62, 
doi: 10.2174/18744737112059990005 . 
[211] B. Sessa, L. Higbed, S. O’Brien, C. Durant, C. Sakal, D. Titheradge, 
T.M. Williams, A. Rose-Morris, E. Brew-Girard, S. Burrows, C. Wiseman, 
S. Wilson, J. Rickard, D.J. Nutt, First study of safety and tolerability of 
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted 
psychotherapy 
in 
patients 
with alcohol use disorder, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 35 (2021) 375–383, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881121991792 . 
[212] C. Touriño, R. Maldonado, O. Valverde, MDMA attenuates THC with- 
drawal syndrome in mice, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 193 (2007) 75–84, 
doi: 10.1007/s00213-007-0772-5 . 
[213] E.J. Bilsky, Y. Hui, C.L. Hubbell, L.D. Reid, Methylenedioxymetham- 
phetamine’s capacity to establish place preferences and modify intake of 
an alcoholic beverage, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 37 (1990) 633–638, 
doi: 10.1016/0091-3057(90)90538-S . 
29 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
[214] E.G. Pitts, D.W. Curry, K.N. Hampshire, M.B. Young, L.L. Howell, ( ± )-MDMA and 
its enantiomers: potential therapeutic advantages of R( − )-MDMA, Psychopharma- 
cology (Berl.) 235 (2018) 377–392, doi: 10.1007/s00213-017-4812-5 . 
[215] J.B. Zawilska, J. Wojcieszak, Salvia divinorum: from Mazatec medicinal and hallu- 
cinogenic plant to emerging recreational drug, Hum. Psychopharmacol. Clin. Exp. 
28 (2013) 403–412, doi: 10.1002/hup.2304 . 
[216] B.L. Roth, K. Baner, R. Westkaemper, D. Siebert, K.C. Rice, S. Steinberg, P. Erns- 
berger, R.B. Rothman, Salvinorin A: a potent naturally occurring nonnitroge- 
nous opioid selective agonist, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99 (2002) 11934–11939, 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.182234399 . 
[217] D. Braida, V. Limonta, V. Capurro, P. Fadda, T. Rubino, P. Mascia, A. Zani, E. Gori, 
W. Fratta, D. Parolaro, M. Sala, Involvement of 𝜅-Opioid and endocannabinoid 
system on salvinorin A-induced reward, Biol. Psychiatry. 63 (2008) 286–292, 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.07.020 . 
[218] U. Coﬀeen, F. Pellicer, Salvia divinorum: from recreational hallucinogenic use to 
analgesic and anti-inﬂammatory action, J. Pain Res. Volume 12 (2019) 1069–1076, 
doi: 10.2147/JPR.S188619 . 
[219] A.E. Maqueda, M. Valle, P.H. Addy, R.M. Antonijoan, M. Puntes, J. Coimbra, 
M.R. Ballester, M. Garrido, M. González, J. Claramunt, S. Barker, M.W. John- 
son, R.R. Griﬃths, J. Riba, Salvinorin-A induces intense dissociative eﬀects, 
blocking external sensory perception and modulating interoception and sense of 
body ownership in humans, Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 18 (2015) pyv065, 
doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyv065 . 
[220] A.E. Maqueda, M. Valle, P.H. Addy, R.M. Antonijoan, M. Puntes, J. Coimbra, 
M.R. Ballester, M. Garrido, M. González, J. Claramunt, S. Barker, I. Lomnicka, 
M. Waguespack, M.W. Johnson, R.R. Griﬃths, J. Riba, Naltrexone but not ke- 
tanserin antagonizes the subjective, cardiovascular, and neuroendocrine eﬀects 
of salvinorin-A in humans, Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 19 (2016) pyw016, 
doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyw016 . 
[221] S.R. Ebner, M.F. Roitman, D.N. Potter, A.B. Rachlin, E.H. Chartoﬀ, Depressive-like 
eﬀects of the kappa opioid receptor agonist salvinorin A are associated with de- 
creased phasic dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens, Psychopharmacology 
(Berl.) 210 (2010) 241–252, doi: 10.1007/s00213-010-1836-5 . 
[222] N.D. Volkow, Role of dopamine, the frontal cortex and memory circuits in drug 
addiction: insight from imaging studies, Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 78 (2002) 610–
624, doi: 10.1006/nlme.2002.4099 . 
[223] A.M. Brito-da-Costa, D. Dias-da-Silva, N.G.M. Gomes, R.J. Dinis-Oliveira, 
Á. Madureira-Carvalho, Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of salvinorin A 
and salvia divinorum: clinical and forensic aspects, Pharmaceuticals 14 (2021) 116, 
doi: 10.3390/ph14020116 . 
[224] T.E. Prisinzano, K. Tidgewell, W.W. Harding, 𝜅Opioids as potential treatments for 
stimulant dependence, in: R.S. Rapaka, W. Sadée (Eds.), Drug Addict., Springer 
New York, New York, NY, 2008, pp. 231–245, doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-76678- 
2_15 . 
[225] H.C. Tomasiewicz, M.S. Todtenkopf, E.H. Chartoﬀ, B.M. Cohen, W.A. Car- 
lezon, The kappa-opioid agonist U69,593 blocks cocaine-induced enhance- 
ment of brain stimulation reward, Biol. Psychiatry. 64 (2008) 982–988, 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.05.029 . 
[226] E.H. Chartoﬀ, D. Potter, D. Damez-Werno, B.M. Cohen, W.A. Carlezon, Exposure to 
the selective 𝜅-opioid receptor agonist salvinorin a modulates the behavioral and 
molecular eﬀects of cocaine in rats, Neuropsychopharmacology 33 (2008) 2676–
2687, doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301659 . 
[227] B.M. Kivell, K. Paton, N. Kumar, A. Morani, A. Culverhouse, A. Shepherd, 
S. Welsh, A. Biggerstaﬀ, R. Crowley, T. Prisinzano, Kappa opioid receptor ag- 
onist mesyl sal B attenuates behavioral sensitization to cocaine with fewer 
aversive side-eﬀects than salvinorin A in rodents, Molecules 23 (2018) 2602, 
doi: 10.3390/molecules23102602 . 
[228] A.S. Morani, B. Kivell, T.E. Prisinzano, S. Schenk, Eﬀect of kappa-opioid re- 
ceptor agonists U69593, U50488H, spiradoline and salvinorin A on cocaine- 
induced drug-seeking in rats, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 94 (2009) 244–249, 
doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2009.09.002 . 
[229] A.S. Morani, S. Schenk, T.E. Prisinzano, B.M. Kivell, A single injection of a novel 
kappa opioid receptor agonist salvinorin A attenuates the expression of cocaine- 
induced behavioral sensitization in rats, Behav. Pharmacol. 23 (2012) 162–170, 
doi: 10.1097/FBP.0b013e3283512c1e . 
[230] D.N. Potter, D. Damez-Werno, W.A. Carlezon, B.M. Cohen, E.H. Chartoﬀ, Repeated 
exposure to the 𝜅-opioid receptor agonist salvinorin A modulates extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase and reward sensitivity, Biol. Psychiatry. 70 (2011) 744–
753, doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.05.021 . 
[231] K.B. Freeman, J.E. Naylor, T.E. Prisinzano, W.L. Woolverton, Assessment 
of the kappa opioid agonist, salvinorin A, as a punisher of drug self- 
administration in monkeys, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 231 (2014) 2751–2758, 
doi: 10.1007/s00213-014-3436-2 . 
[232] B.M. Kivell, A.W.M. Ewald, T.E. Prisinzano, Salvinorin A analogs and other kappa- 
opioid receptor compounds as treatments for cocaine abuse, in: Adv. Pharmacol., 
Elsevier, 2014, pp. 481–511, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-420118-7.00012-3 . 
[233] N.I. Vavilov, D. Löve, N.I. Vavilov, Origin and Geography of Cultivated Plants, 
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2009 . 
[234] M.D. Merlin, Archaeological evidence for the tradition of psychoac- 
tive plant use in the old world, Econ. Bot. 57 (2003) 295–323, 
doi: 10.1663/0013-0001(2003)057[0295:AEFTTO]2.0.CO;2 . 
[235] E.B. Russo, History of cannabis and its preparations in saga, science, and sobriquet, 
Chem. Biodivers. 4 (2007) 1614–1648, doi: 10.1002/cbdv.200790144 . 
[236] E. Birch, The use of indian hemp in the treatment of chronic chlo- 
ral and chronic opium poisoning, The Lancet 133 (1889) 625, 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(00)30567-0 . 
[237] E. Labigalini, L.R. Rodrigues, D.X. Da Silveira, Therapeutic use of cannabis 
by crack addicts in Brazil, J. Psychoactive Drugs. 31 (1999) 451–455, 
doi: 10.1080/02791072.1999.10471776 . 
[238] Z. Walsh, R. Gonzalez, K. Crosby, M.S. Thiessen, C. Carroll, M.O. Bonn-Miller, Med- 
ical cannabis and mental health: a guided systematic review, Clin. Psychol. Rev. 
51 (2017) 15–29, doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2016.10.002 . 
[239] P. Lucas, A. Reiman, M. Earleywine, S.K. McGowan, M. Oleson, M.P. Coward, 
B. Thomas, Cannabis as a substitute for alcohol and other drugs: a dispensary- 
based survey of substitution eﬀect in Canadian medical cannabis patients, Addict. 
Res. Theory. 21 (2013) 435–442, doi: 10.3109/16066359.2012.733465 . 
[240] T.H. Mikuriya, Cannabis as a substitute for alcohol: a harm-reduction approach, J. 
Cannabis Ther. 4 (2004) 79–93, doi: 10.1300/J175v04n01_04 . 
[241] T.J. O’Connell, C.B. Bou-Matar, Long term marijuana users seeking medical 
cannabis in California (2001–2007): demographics, social characteristics, patterns 
of cannabis and other drug use of 4117 applicants, Harm. Reduct. J. 4 (2007) 16, 
doi: 10.1186/1477-7517-4-16 . 
[242] B.J. Piper, R.M. DeKeuster, M.L. Beals, C.M. Cobb, C.A. Burchman, L. Perkinson, 
S.T. Lynn, S.D. Nichols, A.T. Abess, Substitution of medical cannabis for pharma- 
ceutical agents for pain, anxiety, and sleep, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 31 (2017) 
569–575, doi: 10.1177/0269881117699616 . 
[243] A. Reiman, Medical cannabis patients: patient proﬁles and health care 
utilization patterns, Complement. Health Pract. Rev. 12 (2007) 31–50, 
doi: 10.1177/1533210107301834 . 
[244] A. Reiman, Cannabis as a substitute for alcohol and other drugs, Harm. Reduct. J. 
6 (2009) 35, doi: 10.1186/1477-7517-6-35 . 
[245] C. Risso, S. Boniface, M.S. Subbaraman, A. Englund, Does cannabis com- 
plement or substitute alcohol consumption? A systematic review of hu- 
man and animal studies, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 34 (2020) 938–954, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881120919970 . 
[246] C.L. Bergeria, A.S. Huhn, K.E. Dunn, The impact of naturalistic cannabis use 
on self-reported opioid withdrawal, J. Subst. Abuse Treat. 113 (2020) 108005, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jsat.2020.108005 . 
[247] S. Lake, E. Nosova, J. Buxton, Z. Walsh, M.E. Socías, K. Hayashi, T. Kerr, M.J. Mil- 
loy, Characterizing motivations for cannabis use in a cohort of people who use illicit 
drugs: a latent class analysis, PLoS ONE 15 (2020) e0233463, doi: 10.1371/jour- 
nal.pone.0233463 . 
[248] P. Lucas, Z. Walsh, Medical cannabis access, use, and substitution for prescription 
opioids and other substances: a survey of authorized medical cannabis patients, 
Int. J. Drug Policy. 42 (2017) 30–35, doi: 10.1016/j.drugpo.2017.01.011 . 
[249] P. Lucas, E.P. Baron, N. Jikomes, Medical cannabis patterns of use and substitution 
for opioids & other pharmaceutical drugs, alcohol, tobacco, and illicit substances; 
results from a cross-sectional survey of authorized patients, Harm. Reduct. J. 16 
(2019) 9, doi: 10.1186/s12954-019-0278-6 . 
[250] P. Lucas, S. Boyd, M.-.J. Milloy, Z. Walsh, Cannabis signiﬁcantly reduces the use of 
prescription opioids and improves quality of life in authorized patients: results of a 
large prospective study, Pain Med 22 (2021) 727–739, doi: 10.1093/pm/pnaa396 . 
[251] World Health OrganizationGlobal Hepatitis Report 2017, World Health Organi- 
zation, Geneva, 2017 https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/255016 (accessed 
September 22, 2021) . 
[252] Y. Gaoni, R. Mechoulam, Isolation, structure, and partial synthesis of an 
active constituent of hashish, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 86 (1964) 1646–1647, 
doi: 10.1021/ja01062a046 . 
[253] A.C. Howlett, M.R. Johnson, L.S. Melvin, G.M. Milne, Nonclassical cannabinoid 
analgetics inhibit adenylate cyclase: development of a cannabinoid receptor model, 
Mol. Pharmacol. 33 (1988) 297–302 . 
[254] J. van Wel, D. Spronk, K. Kuypers, E. Theunissen, S. Toennes, R. Verkes, 
J. Ramaekers, Psychedelic symptoms of cannabis and cocaine use as a func- 
tion of trait impulsivity, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 29 (2015) 324–334, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881114563633 . 
[255] M. Earleywine, L.F. Ueno, M.N. Mian, B.R. Altman, Cannabis-induced 
oceanic boundlessness, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 35 (2021) 841–847, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881121997099 . 
[256] M.S. Ferrara, Peak-experience and the entheogenic use of cannabis in world reli- 
gions, J. Psychedelic Stud. 4 (2021) 179–191, doi: 10.1556/2054.2020.00122 . 
[257] P.G. Johnstad, Cannabis as entheogen: survey and interview data on the spiritual 
use of cannabis, J. Cannabis Res. 2 (2020) 30, doi: 10.1186/s42238-020-00032-2 . 
[258] D.E. Nichols, Chemistry and structure–activity relationships of psychedelics, 
in: A.L. Halberstadt, F.X. Vollenweider, D.E. Nichols (Eds.), Behav. Neurobiol. 
Psychedelic Drugs, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2017, pp. 1–43, 
doi: 10.1007/7854_2017_475 . 
[259] R.L. Carhart-Harris, How do psychedelics work? Curr. Opin. Psychiatry. 32 (2019) 
16–21, doi: 10.1097/YCO.0000000000000467 . 
[260] M.O. Bonn-Miller, S. Sisley, P. Riggs, B. Yazar-Klosinski, J.B. Wang, M.J.E. Loﬂin, 
B. Shechet, C. Hennigan, R. Matthews, A. Emerson, R. Doblin, The short- 
term impact of 3 smoked cannabis preparations versus placebo on PTSD symp- 
toms: a randomized cross-over clinical trial, PLoS ONE 16 (2021) e0246990, 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0246990 . 
[261] A. Englund, P.D. Morrison, J. Nottage, D. Hague, F. Kane, S. Bonaccorso, J.M. Stone, 
A. Reichenberg, R. Brenneisen, D. Holt, A. Feilding, L. Walker, R.M. Murray, 
S. Kapur, Cannabidiol inhibits THC-elicited paranoid symptoms and hippocampal- 
dependent memory impairment, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 27 (2013) 19–27, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881112460109 . 
[262] C.J.A. Morgan, R.K. Das, A. Joye, H.V. Curran, S.K. Kamboj, Cannabidiol reduces 
cigarette consumption in tobacco smokers: preliminary ﬁndings, Addict. Behav. 38 
(2013) 2433–2436, doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2013.03.011 . 
30 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
[263] L.H. Parsons, Y.L. Hurd, Endocannabinoid signalling in reward and addiction, Nat. 
Rev. Neurosci. 16 (2015) 579–594, doi: 10.1038/nrn4004 . 
[264] H. Kathuria, F.T. Leone, E.R. Neptune, Treatment of tobacco dependence: 
current state of the art, Curr. Opin. Pulm. Med. 24 (2018) 327–334, 
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000491 . 
[265] J.L. Koehl, D.E. Zimmerman, P.J. Bridgeman, Medications for management 
of opioid use disorder, Am. J. Health. Syst. Pharm. 76 (2019) 1097–1103, 
doi: 10.1093/ajhp/zxz105 . 
[266] A.B. Srivastava, J.J. Mariani, F.R. Levin, New directions in the treat- 
ment of opioid withdrawal, The Lancet 395 (2020) 1938–1948, 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30852-7 . 
[267] National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (U.S.)The Health Ef- 
fects of Cannabis and cannabinoids: the Current State of Evidence and Recommen- 
dations For Research, The National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2017 . 
[268] M.E. Sloan, J.L. Gowin, V.A. Ramchandani, Y.L. Hurd, B.Le Foll, The endocannabi- 
noid system as a target for addiction treatment: trials and tribulations, Neurophar- 
macology 124 (2017) 73–83, doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.05.031 . 
[269] S. Nielsen, L. Gowing, P. Sabioni, B.Le Foll, Pharmacotherapies for 
cannabis dependence, Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2020 (2019), 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008940.pub3 . 
[270] A. Bisaga, M.A. Sullivan, A. Glass, K. Mishlen, M. Pavlicova, M. Haney, W.N. Raby, 
F.R. Levin, K.M. Carpenter, J.J. Mariani, E.V. Nunes, The eﬀects of dronabinol dur- 
ing detoxiﬁcation and the initiation of treatment with extended release naltrexone, 
Drug Alcohol Depend 154 (2015) 38–45, doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.05.013 . 
[271] D.J. Allsop, J. Copeland, N. Lintzeris, A.J. Dunlop, M. Montebello, C. Sadler, 
G.R. Rivas, R.M. Holland, P. Muhleisen, M.M. Norberg, J. Booth, I.S. McGregor, 
Nabiximols as an agonist replacement therapy during cannabis withdrawal: a ran- 
domized clinical trial, JAMA Psychiatry 71 (2014) 281, doi: 10.1001/jamapsychi- 
atry.2013.3947 . 
[272] N. Lintzeris, A. Bhardwaj, L. Mills, A. Dunlop, J. Copeland, I. McGregor, R. Bruno, 
J. Gugusheﬀ, N. Phung, M. Montebello, T. Chan, A. Kirby, M. Hall, M. Jef- 
feries, J. Luksza, M. Shanahan, R. Kevin, D. Allsop, for the Agonist Replacement 
for Cannabis Dependence (ARCD) study group, Nabiximols for the treatment of 
cannabis dependence: a randomized clinical trial, JAMA Intern. Med. 179 (2019) 
1242, doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.1993 . 
[273] J.M. Trigo, A. Soliman, L.C. Quilty, B. Fischer, J. Rehm, P. Selby, A.J. Barnes, 
M.A. Huestis, T.P. George, D.L. Streiner, G. Staios, B.Le Foll, Nabiximols combined 
with motivational enhancement/cognitive behavioral therapy for the treatment 
of cannabis dependence: a pilot randomized clinical trial, PLoS ONE 13 (2018) 
e0190768, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0190768 . 
[274] F.R. Levin, J.J. Mariani, D.J. Brooks, M. Pavlicova, W. Cheng, E.V. Nunes, 
Dronabinol for the treatment of cannabis dependence: a randomized, double- 
blind, placebo-controlled trial, Drug Alcohol Depend 116 (2011) 142–150, 
doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.12.010 . 
[275] F.R. Levin, J.J. Mariani, M. Pavlicova, D. Brooks, A. Glass, A. Mahony, 
E.V. Nunes, A. Bisaga, E. Dakwar, K.M. Carpenter, M.A. Sullivan, J.C. Choi, 
Dronabinol and lofexidine for cannabis use disorder: a randomized, double- 
blind, placebo-controlled trial, Drug Alcohol Depend 159 (2016) 53–60, 
doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.11.025 . 
[276] A.J. Budney, R.G. Vandrey, J.R. Hughes, B.A. Moore, B. Bahrenburg, Oral delta- 
9-tetrahydrocannabinol suppresses cannabis withdrawal symptoms, Drug Alcohol 
Depend 86 (2007) 22–29, doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2006.04.014 . 
[277] M. Haney, C.L. Hart, S.K. Vosburg, J. Nasser, A. Bennett, C. Zubaran, R.W. Foltin, 
Marijuana withdrawal in humans: eﬀects of oral THC or divalproex, Neuropsy- 
chopharmacology 29 (2004) 158–170, doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300310 . 
[278] M. Haney, C.L. Hart, S.K. Vosburg, S.D. Comer, S.C. Reed, R.W. Foltin, Ef- 
fects of THC and lofexidine in a human laboratory model of marijuana 
withdrawal and relapse, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 197 (2008) 157–168, 
doi: 10.1007/s00213-007-1020-8 . 
[279] C.J. Jicha, M.R. Lofwall, P.A. Nuzzo, S. Babalonis, S.C. Elayi, S.L. Walsh, Safety of 
oral dronabinol during opioid withdrawal in humans, Drug Alcohol Depend 157 
(2015) 179–183, doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.09.031 . 
[280] M.R. Lofwall, S. Babalonis, P.A. Nuzzo, S.C. Elayi, S.L. Walsh, Opioid withdrawal 
suppression eﬃcacy of oral dronabinol in opioid dependent humans, Drug Alcohol 
Depend 164 (2016) 143–150, doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.05.002 . 
[281] L.H. Lundahl, M.K. Greenwald, Eﬀect of oral THC pretreatment on marijuana cue- 
induced responses in cannabis dependent volunteers, Drug Alcohol Depend 149 
(2015) 187–193, doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.01.046 . 
[282] R. Vandrey, M.L. Stitzer, M.Z. Mintzer, M.A. Huestis, J.A. Murray, D. Lee, The dose 
eﬀects of short-term dronabinol (oral THC) maintenance in daily cannabis users, 
Drug Alcohol Depend 128 (2013) 64–70, doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.08.001 . 
[283] M. Haney, Z.D. Cooper, G. Bedi, S.K. Vosburg, S.D. Comer, R.W. Foltin, Nabilone 
decreases marijuana withdrawal and a laboratory measure of marijuana relapse, 
Neuropsychopharmacology 38 (2013) 1557–1565, doi: 10.1038/npp.2013.54 . 
[284] E.S. Herrmann, Z.D. Cooper, G. Bedi, D. Ramesh, S.C. Reed, S.D. Comer, 
R.W. Foltin, M. Haney, Eﬀects of zolpidem alone and in combination 
with nabilone on cannabis withdrawal and a laboratory model of re- 
lapse in cannabis users, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 233 (2016) 2469–2478, 
doi: 10.1007/s00213-016-4298-6 . 
[285] K.P. Hill, M.D. Palastro, S.A. Gruber, G.M. Fitzmaurice, S.F. Greenﬁeld, S.E. Lukas, 
R.D. Weiss, Nabilone pharmacotherapy for cannabis dependence: a randomized, 
controlled pilot study: nabilone for cannabis dependence: a pilot study, Am. J. 
Addict. 26 (2017) 795–801, doi: 10.1111/ajad.12622 . 
[286] J.M. Trigo, D. Lagzdins, J. Rehm, P. Selby, I. Gamaleddin, B. Fischer, A.J. Barnes, 
M.A. Huestis, B.Le Foll, Eﬀects of ﬁxed or self-titrated dosages of Sativex on 
cannabis withdrawal and cravings, Drug Alcohol Depend 161 (2016) 298–306, 
doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.02.020 . 
[287] J.M. Trigo, A. Soliman, G. Staios, L. Quilty, B. Fischer, T.P. George, J. Rehm, 
P. Selby, A.J. Barnes, M.A. Huestis, B.Le Foll, Sativex associated with behavioral- 
relapse prevention strategy as treatment for cannabis dependence: a case series, J. 
Addict. Med. 10 (2016) 274–279, doi: 10.1097/ADM.0000000000000229 . 
[288] J. van Amsterdam, J. Vervloet, G. de Weert, V.J.A. Buwalda, A.E. Goudri- 
aan, W. van den Brink, Acceptance of pharmaceutical cannabis substitution by 
cannabis using patients with schizophrenia, Harm. Reduct. J. 15 (2018) 47, 
doi: 10.1186/s12954-018-0253-7 . 
[289] E.B. Russo, J. Marcu, Cannabis pharmacology: the usual suspects and a 
few promising leads, in: Adv. Pharmacol, Elsevier, 2017, pp. 67–134, 
doi: 10.1016/bs.apha.2017.03.004 . 
[290] E.B. Russo, G.W. Guy, A tale of two cannabinoids: the therapeutic rationale for com- 
bining tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol, Med. Hypotheses. 66 (2006) 234–
246, doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2005.08.026 . 
[291] T.P. Freeman, C. Hindocha, G. Baio, N.D.C. Shaban, E.M. Thomas, D. Ast- 
bury, A.M. Freeman, R. Lees, S. Craft, P.D. Morrison, M.A.P. Bloomﬁeld, 
D. O’Ryan, J. Kinghorn, C.J.A. Morgan, A. Mofeez, H.V. Curran, Cannabidiol 
for the treatment of cannabis use disorder: a phase 2a, double-blind, placebo- 
controlled, randomised, adaptive Bayesian trial, Lancet Psych. 7 (2020) 865–874, 
doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30290-X . 
[292] V. Mongeau-Pérusse, S. Brissette, J. Bruneau, P. Conrod, S. Dubreucq, G. Gazil, 
E. Stip, D. Jutras-Aswad, Cannabidiol as a treatment for craving and relapse in 
individuals with cocaine use disorder: a randomized placebo-controlled trial, Ad- 
diction 116 (2021) 2431–2442, doi: 10.1111/add.15417 . 
[293] M. Prud’homme, R. Cata, D. Jutras-Aswad, Cannabidiol as an intervention for ad- 
dictive behaviors: a systematic review of the evidence, Subst. Abuse Res. Treat. 9 
(2015) SART.S25081, doi: 10.4137/SART.S25081 . 
[294] L.A. Rodrigues, M.E.S. Caroba, F.K. Taba, R. Filev, A.D. Gallassi, Evaluation 
of the potential use of cannabidiol in the treatment of cocaine use disor- 
der: a systematic review, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 196 (2020) 172982, 
doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2020.172982 . 
[295] C.O. Cunningham, J.L. Starrels, C. Zhang, M.A. Bachhuber, N.L. Sohler, F.R. Levin, 
H. Minami, D.E. Slawek, J.H. Arnsten, Medical marijuana and opioids (MEMO) 
study: protocol of a longitudinal cohort study to examine if medical cannabis re- 
duces opioid use among adults with chronic pain, BMJ Open 10 (2020) e043400, 
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-043400 . 
[296] M.E. Socías, E. Wood, S. Lake, S. Nolan, N. Fairbairn, K. Hayashi, H.P. Shulha, 
S. Liu, T. Kerr, M.-.J. Milloy, High-intensity cannabis use is associated with reten- 
tion in opioid agonist treatment: a longitudinal analysis: cannabis use and opioid 
agonist treatment, Addiction 113 (2018) 2250–2258, doi: 10.1111/add.14398 . 
[297] R. Gunn, K. Jackson, B. Borsari, J. Metrik, A longitudinal examination of 
daily patterns of cannabis and alcohol co-use among medicinal and recre- 
ational veteran cannabis users, Drug Alcohol Depend 205 (2019) 107661, 
doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2019.107661 . 
[298] M.S. Subbaraman, Substitution and complementarity of alcohol and cannabis: 
a review of the literature, Subst. Use Misuse. 51 (2016) 1399–1414, 
doi: 10.3109/10826084.2016.1170145 . 
[299] R. Gittins, B. Sessa, Can prescribed medical cannabis use reduce the use of 
other more harmful drugs? Drug Sci. Policy Law 6 (2020) 205032451990006, 
doi: 10.1177/2050324519900067 . 
[300] E.B. Russo, The case for the entourage eﬀect and conventional breeding 
of clinical cannabis: no “strain, No Gain, Front. Plant Sci. 9 (2019) 1969, 
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.01969 . 
[301] R. Gallily, Z. Yekhtin, L.O. Hanu š , Overcoming the bell-shaped dose-response of 
cannabidiol by using &lt;i&gt;Cannabis&lt;/i&gt; extract enriched in cannabidiol, 
Pharmacol. Amp Pharm. 06 (2015) 75–85, doi: 10.4236/pp.2015.62010 . 
[302] E.B. Russo, Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid- 
terpenoid entourage eﬀects: phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage eﬀects, Br. J. 
Pharmacol. 163 (2011) 1344–1364, doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01238.x . 
[303] A. Garcia-Romeu, A.K. Davis, F. Erowid, E. Erowid, R.R. Griﬃths, M.W. John- 
son, Cessation and reduction in alcohol consumption and misuse af- 
ter psychedelic use, J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.). 33 (2019) 1088–1101, 
doi: 10.1177/0269881119845793 . 
[304] A. Garcia-Romeu, A.K. Davis, E. Erowid, F. Erowid, R.R. Griﬃths, M.W. John- 
son, Persisting reductions in cannabis, opioid, and stimulant misuse after nat- 
uralistic psychedelic use: an online survey, Front. Psychiatry. 10 (2020) 955, 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00955 . 
[305] M.W. Johnson, A. Garcia-Romeu, P.S. Johnson, R.R. Griﬃths, An online survey 
of tobacco smoking cessation associated with naturalistic psychedelic use, J. Psy- 
chopharmacol. (Oxf.). 31 (2017) 841–850, doi: 10.1177/0269881116684335 . 
[306] W. Lawn, J.E. Hallak, J.A. Crippa, R. Dos Santos, L. Porﬀy, M.J. Barratt, 
J.A. Ferris, A.R. Winstock, C.J.A. Morgan, Well-being, problematic alcohol con- 
sumption and acute subjective drug eﬀects in past-year ayahuasca users: a 
large, international, self-selecting online survey, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 15201, 
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-14700-6 . 
[307] T. Lea, N. Amada, H. Jungaberle, H. Schecke, N. Scherbaum, M. Klein, Per- 
ceived outcomes of psychedelic microdosing as self-managed therapies for mental 
and substance use disorders, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 237 (2020) 1521–1532, 
doi: 10.1007/s00213-020-05477-0 . 
[308] B. Szigeti, L. Kartner, A. Blemings, F. Rosas, A. Feilding, D.J. Nutt, R.L. Carhart- 
Harris, D. Erritzoe, Self-blinding citizen science to explore psychedelic microdos- 
ing, Elife 10 (2021) e62878, doi: 10.7554/eLife.62878 . 
[309] L.J. Mertens, K.H. Preller, Classical psychedelics as therapeutics in psychi- 
atry – current clinical evidence and potential therapeutic mechanisms in 
31 


F.R. Mendes, C.d.S. Costa, V.D. Wiltenburg et al. 
Addiction Neuroscience 3 (2022) 100025 
substance use and mood disorders, Pharmacopsychiatry 54 (2021) 176–190, 
doi: 10.1055/a-1341-1907 . 
[310] A.C.Z. Ferreira, L. de O. Borba, F.C. Capistrano, J. Czarnobay, M.A. Maftum, 
Factors that interfere in patient compliance with chemical dependence treat- 
ment: health professionals’ perceptions, REME Rev. Min. Enferm. 19 (2015), 
doi: 10.5935/1415-2762.20150032 . 
[311] O. Lindhiem, C.B. Bennett, C.J. Trentacosta, C. McLear, Client preferences aﬀect 
treatment satisfaction, completion, and clinical outcome: a meta-analysis, Clin. Psy- 
chol. Rev. 34 (2014) 506–517, doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2014.06.002 . 
[312] S.D. Muthukumaraswamy, A. Forsyth, T. Lumley, Blinding and expectancy con- 
founds in psychedelic randomized controlled trials, Expert Rev. Clin. Pharmacol. 
14 (2021) 1133–1152, doi: 10.1080/17512433.2021.1933434 . 
[313] M.P. Bogenschutz, M.W. Johnson, Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of ad- 
dictions, Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry. 64 (2016) 250–258, 
doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002 . 
[314] R.G. dos Santos, J.C. Bouso, M.Á. Alcázar-Córcoles, J.E.C. Hallak, Eﬃcacy, tolera- 
bility, and safety of serotonergic psychedelics for the management of mood, anxi- 
ety, and substance-use disorders: a systematic review of systematic reviews, Expert 
Rev. Clin. Pharmacol. 11 (2018) 889–902, doi: 10.1080/17512433.2018.1511424 . 
[315] G. Martinotti, S. Chiappini, M. Pettorruso, A. Mosca, A. Miuli, F. Di Carlo, 
G. D’Andrea, R. Collevecchio, I. Di Muzio, S.L. Sensi, M. Di Giannantonio, Ther- 
apeutic potentials of ketamine and esketamine in obsessive–compulsive disorder 
(OCD), substance use disorders (SUD) and eating disorders (ED): a review of the 
current literature, Brain Sci. 11 (2021) 856, doi: 10.3390/brainsci11070856 . 
[316] C.M. Reiﬀ, E.E. Richman, C.B. Nemeroﬀ, L.L. Carpenter, A.S. Widge, C.I. Ro- 
driguez, N.H. Kalin, W.M. McDonald, and the work group on biomarkers and 
novel treatments, a division of the american psychiatric association council of re- 
search, psychedelics and psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy, Am. J. Psychiatry. 
177 (2020) 391–410, doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2019.19010035 . 
[317] C. Ly, A.C. Greb, L.P. Cameron, J.M. Wong, E.V. Barragan, P.C. Wilson, K.F. Bur- 
bach, S. Soltanzadeh Zarandi, A. Sood, M.R. Paddy, W.C. Duim, M.Y. Dennis, 
A.K. McAllister, K.M. Ori-McKenney, J.A. Gray, D.E. Olson, Psychedelics pro- 
mote structural and functional neural plasticity, Cell Rep 23 (2018) 3170–3182, 
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.05.022 . 
[318] C.M. Reiﬀ, W.M. McDonald, MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for the treatment 
of PTSD, Braz. J. Psychiatry. 43 (2021) 123–124, doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2020- 
0020 . 
32 
