See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325967625
Psychedelic therapy for smoking cessation: Qualitative analysis of participant
accounts
Article  in  Journal of Psychopharmacology · June 2018
DOI: 10.1177/0269881118780612
CITATIONS
154
READS
3,550
5 authors, including:
Tehseen Noorani
Durham University
29 PUBLICATIONS   694 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Albert Garcia-Romeu
Johns Hopkins Medicine
72 PUBLICATIONS   2,997 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Matthew W Johnson
Johns Hopkins Medicine
209 PUBLICATIONS   17,393 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Roland R Griffiths
Johns Hopkins Medicine
488 PUBLICATIONS   32,345 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Tehseen Noorani on 25 June 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.


https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881118780612
Journal of Psychopharmacology
﻿1­–14
© The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0269881118780612
journals.sagepub.com/home/jop
Introduction
Recent research with classic serotonin 2A receptor agonist hal-
lucinogens (i.e. psychedelics) has generated renewed interest 
in these drugs as a potential avenue for developing novel 
addiction treatments (Bogenschutz and Johnson, 2016; Garcia-
Romeu et  al., 2016; Krebs and Johansen, 2012; Sessa and 
Johnson, 2015). Pilot studies have shown safety and feasibility 
of psilocybin, a naturally occurring psychedelic found in so-
called ‘magic mushrooms,’ as a therapeutic tool in the treat-
ment of tobacco (Johnson et al., 2014) and alcohol use disorders 
(Bogenschutz et al., 2015). These findings add to a body of 
converging evidence suggesting psychedelics may have thera-
peutic potential.
Laboratory studies administering psychedelics to carefully 
screened and prepared individuals suggest these substances can 
occasion lasting changes in mood, behaviours, and attitudes 
(Doblin, 1991; Griffiths et al., 2006, 2008, 2011; MacLean et al., 
2011). Epidemiological data show significant associations 
between psychedelic use and reduced recidivism in formerly 
incarcerated, substance-involved individuals (Hendricks et  al., 
2014), and reduced psychological distress and suicidality in a 
national United States sample (Hendricks et al., 2015). A meta-
analysis investigating the psychedelic lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD) in the treatment of alcoholism found significantly greater 
reductions in alcohol misuse at initial follow-up in patients 
treated with LSD compared with control conditions (Krebs and 
Johansen, 2012). Observational studies have found decreased 
rates of alcohol and other drug misuse among religious users of 
ayahuasca, which contains the psychedelic dimethyltryptamine 
(Doering-Silveira et  al., 2005; Fábregas et  al., 2010; Halpern 
et al., 2008).
In a recent open-label pilot study, 15 treatment-seeking smok-
ers completed a smoking cessation intervention combining two 
to three administrations of psilocybin with cognitive behavioural 
Psychedelic therapy for smoking  
cessation: Qualitative analysis of  
participant accounts
Tehseen Noorani1,2, Albert Garcia-Romeu3, Thomas C Swift3*,4,  
Roland R Griffiths3,5 and Matthew W Johnson3     
Abstract
Background: Recent pilot trials suggest feasibility and potential efficacy of psychedelic-facilitated addiction treatment interventions. Fifteen 
participants completed a psilocybin-facilitated smoking cessation pilot study between 2009 and 2015.
Aims: The aims of this study were as follows: (1) to identify perceived mechanisms of change leading to smoking cessation in the pilot study; (2) to 
identify key themes in participant experiences and long-term outcomes to better understand the therapeutic process.
Methods: Participants were invited to a retrospective follow-up interview an average of 30 months after initial psilocybin sessions. Semi-structured 
interviews were conducted with 12 of the 15 participants. Data were analysed using thematic analysis.
Results: Participants reported gaining vivid insights into self-identity and reasons for smoking from their psilocybin sessions. Experiences of 
interconnectedness, awe, and curiosity persisted beyond the duration of acute drug effects. Participants emphasised that the content of psilocybin 
experiences overshadowed any short-term withdrawal symptoms. Preparatory counselling, strong rapport with the study team, and a sense of momentum 
once engaged in the study treatment were perceived as vital additional factors in achieving abstinence. In addition, participants reported a range of 
persisting positive changes beyond smoking cessation, including increased aesthetic appreciation, altruism, and pro-social behaviour.
Conclusions: The findings highlight the value of qualitative research in the psychopharmacological investigation of psychedelics. They describe 
perceived connections between drug- and non-drug factors, and provide suggestions for future research trial design and clinical applications.
Keywords
Qualitative research, smoking cessation, addiction, psilocybin, psychedelic
1Department of Mental Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
2Department of Anthropology, Durham University, UK
3Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
4RiverStyx Foundation, Kirkland, Washington, DC, USA
5Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
*Thomas C Swift has been employed as a Casual-As Needed Research 
Program Assistant at Johns Hopkins University on a project 
independent of this research.
Corresponding author:
Tehseen Noorani, Department of Anthropology, Durham University, 
Dawson Building, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK. 
Email: tehseen.n.noorani@durham.ac.uk
780612 JOP0010.1177/0269881118780612Journal of PsychopharmacologyNoorani et al.
research-article2018
Original Paper


2	
Journal of Psychopharmacology 00(0)
therapy (CBT) (Johnson et al., 2014). Of the 15 participants, 80% 
(n = 12) were biologically verified as smoking abstinent 6 months 
post-treatment (Johnson et al., 2014), 67% (n = 10) were absti-
nent at 12 months post-treatment, and 60% (n = 9) were abstinent 
at a long-term follow-up an average of 30 months post-treatment 
(Johnson et al., 2016). Although results from an open-label study 
cannot demonstrate efficacy, the most effective current pharma-
cotherapies for smoking cessation typically show success rates 
⩽35% at 6 months and beyond (Cahill et al., 2014; Hays et al., 
2008; Mottillo et al., 2009; Tønnesen et al., 2003).
The psychological mechanisms of action of psychedelic-
facilitated treatments remain poorly understood. Preliminary 
quantitative analyses suggest that acute mystical-type drug 
effects are significantly associated with therapeutic outcomes in 
psilocybin-facilitated addiction treatment (Bogenschutz et  al., 
2015; Garcia-Romeu, et  al., 2014). Recent double-blind, con-
trolled studies of psilocybin in patients with life-threatening can-
cer diagnoses also found lasting antidepressant and anti-anxiety 
effects that were mediated by psilocybin-occasioned mystical-
type experiences (Griffiths et al., 2016; Ross et al., 2016). Such 
findings are consistent with earlier researchers’ assertions that 
the subjective effects of psychedelics play a pivotal role in gener-
ating lasting therapeutic benefits (e.g. Osmond, 1957; Pahnke 
and Richards, 1966; Savage and McCabe, 1973).
Psychological insight, increased personality openness, changes 
in beliefs and values, increased motivation and enhanced self-effi-
cacy have been hypothesised as possible psychological mecha-
nisms of psychedelic-facilitated addiction treatment (Bogenschutz 
and Pommy, 2012). Recent novel qualitative research has offered 
additional insights into potential psychological mechanisms of 
psilocybin-facilitated treatment. One such study found that cancer 
patients with symptoms of depression and anxiety reported a range 
of positive effects from psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy, includ-
ing greater relational embeddedness, emotional range and wisdom, 
as well as revised life priorities, alterations to identity, and move-
ments from feelings of separateness to interconnectedness (Belser 
et al., 2017). A second recent study on patients’ accounts of psilo-
cybin-assisted therapy for treatment-resistant depression reported 
shifts from disconnection (to self, others and the world) to connec-
tion, and from avoidance of difficult memories and emotions to 
acceptance (Watts et al., 2017). 
The primary aim of this qualitative study was to characterise 
the perceived mechanisms of change attributed to a structured 
psilocybin-facilitated smoking cessation treatment. A secondary 
aim was to identify themes emerging from participant accounts 
of their experience undergoing psychedelic-facilitated addiction 
treatment, including perceptions of the separate facets of treat-
ment and the overall intervention, and any additional long-term 
outcomes. As clinical research with psychedelics is still in its 
early stages, such experiences can offer insights for improving 
best practice in the emerging field of psychedelic research and 
psychotherapy for substance use disorders.
Methods
This retrospective follow-up study was approved by the Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine Institutional Review 
Board. All 15 individuals who completed an earlier psilocybin-
facilitated smoking cessation pilot study were contacted via 
email or telephone and invited to participate in this supplemen-
tary qualitative study.
In the original study treatment, participants attended four 
weekly counselling meetings with two trained study guides 
(see Johnson et al., 2014). These meetings consisted of a stand-
ardised evidence-based CBT treatment for smoking cessation 
(Marks and Sykes, 2002; Sykes and Marks, 2001), and special-
ised preparation for psilocybin sessions. In addition, partici-
pants received mindfulness training in the form of a short 
body-scan meditation (Kabat-Zinn, 1990), developed a mantra 
or motivational statement toward quitting smoking, and used a 
scented oil and brief guided imagery to aid in their efforts. On 
their target quit date (TQD) in week 5, participants were 
administered a moderate dose (20 mg/70 kg) of psilocybin. 
During all psilocybin sessions a program of music was played. 
Participants were instructed to focus their attention inward, 
and with regards to their experiences, to ‘trust, let go, and be 
open.’
After the first psilocybin session (i.e. TQD), weekly follow-
up meetings were held for 10 weeks to discuss psilocybin session 
experiences, provide support for ongoing abstinence, and track 
smoking status. A second, higher dose (30 mg/70 kg) of psilocy-
bin was administered approximately 2 weeks after the TQD. 
Participants were required to maintain at least four consecutive 
days of abstinence between the first and second psilocybin ses-
sions to continue receiving the study treatment. The rationale for 
this was to ensure that participants’ intention to quit smoking was 
sincere and not merely a desire to receive psilocybin. A third 
high-dose psilocybin session was available approximately 8 
weeks after the TQD, with 3 of the 15 participants opting out of 
this final psilocybin session. All participants returned for follow-
up meetings 6 and 12 months after the TQD.
This study presents new retrospective qualitative interview 
data regarding participants’ experiences in the aforementioned 
treatment study. Twelve individuals (80%) agreed to participate, 
provided written informed consent, and attended a single face-to-
face interview. Interviews occurred on average 30 months (range 
= 16–57 months) after the TQD (i.e. first psilocybin session). On 
the interview day, participants completed some brief question-
naires regarding their smoking behaviour since their last visit and 
provided breath and urine samples to verify current smoking sta-
tus (Johnson et al., 2016). Afterwards, the interviews were con-
ducted and audio recorded in the psilocybin session room used in 
the original intervention (in part to increase context-dependent 
recall). One member of the team (TN) who had had no prior con-
tact with the participants conducted interviews with all 12 
participants.
The interview (see Appendix 1) was designed by the 
authors to inquire into participants’ experiences of the study 
treatment, and the ways it may have helped them quit smok-
ing. In total, the interview was comprised of 43 questions 
probing participants’ current and prior smoking habits, overall 
study treatment experiences, psilocybin session experiences, 
and mechanisms hypothesised to play a role in smoking cessa-
tion outcomes (e.g. Bogenschutz and Pommy, 2012; Gasser 
et  al., 2014; Halpern, 1996; Ross, 2012). To conclude the 
interview, several open-ended items asked participants to pro-
pose alternative mechanisms of action not queried, potential 
future research regarding psilocybin, and possible improve-
ments to the study treatment.


Noorani et al.	
3
Data analysis
Interviews were transcribed by researchers and listened to a second 
time to check for accuracy. Interview transcripts were subjected to 
thematic analysis using three approaches to triangulate findings.
First, two researchers (TN and AG-R) coded transcripts using 
Dedoose (2016) qualitative data analysis software (SocioCultural 
Research Consultants, Los Angeles, CA). Codes were derived both 
top-down from interview questions, and bottom-up from emerging 
patterns agreed upon in regular research analysis meetings. To test 
for inter-rater reliability, two interview transcripts were concur-
rently coded by both raters using the final codebook, and submitted 
to a pooled Cohen's kappa test (Cohen, 1960; De Vries et al., 2008).
Second, a table listing 31 of the most objective items was dis-
tilled from transcripts. This provided data for each participant 
based on their interview responses (e.g. the participant’s current 
smoking status; key elements of the study that led to changes in 
participants’ smoking habits; most profound psilocybin session 
experience, etc.), and allowed for convenient comparisons within 
and between subjects.
Third, one-page summaries were written to outline the main 
turning points in each participant’s narrative of their experience 
in the research study. Each coder created summaries of the inter-
views they coded, and these summaries were subsequently shared 
between the coders to ensure coders' interpretations of partici-
pants’ experiences were congruent.
Using these three complementary methods, interview data 
were analysed for patterns concerning how participants experi-
enced the study treatment, the treatment’s overall effects on par-
ticipants and the mechanisms by which these effects were 
perceived to occur. Participant quotes have been edited to remove 
filler utterances.
Participants
Table 1 shows demographics for the 12 participants who com-
pleted this study. Five of the participants (41.7%) had never used 
a classic hallucinogen before the treatment study, and the remain-
ing seven had a mean (SD) of 10.1 (4.4) lifetime occasions of 
classic hallucinogen use prior to the study, a mean (SD) of 29.9 
(11.5) years before intake to the treatment study. Hereafter, par-
ticipants are referred to by their anonymous study identification 
numbers (e.g. 402).
Results
Inter-rater reliability
Interviews were a median of 1 h 48 min in duration (range: 1.2–
4.2 h). For analysis of inter-rater reliability across the two tran-
scripts and both raters, Cohen’s kappa was calculated at 0.75, 
indicating good-to-excellent inter-rater agreement (Cicchetti, 
1994; Fleiss, 1971).
Current smoking behaviour
For a detailed report of quantitative long-term smoking cessation 
outcomes, see Johnson et  al. (2016). Briefly, 10 participants 
(67%) were biologically confirmed as smoking-abstinent 12 
months post-treatment, and 9 participants (60%) were confirmed 
abstinent at the long-term follow-up interview. A tenth partici-
pant (402) identified as a non-smoker, but tested positive for 
recent smoking, consistent with her admission that she occasion-
ally smokes at parties. Of the two remaining participants who 
were interviewed, Participant 424 did not quit smoking at the 
time of the treatment and continued smoking through long-term 
follow-up, and Participant 405 relapsed between the 12-month 
and long-term follow-ups.
Among the three individuals who did not complete the long-
term follow-up interview, all three were males. Two did not quit 
smoking during the treatment and continued smoking through the 
12-month follow-up, and one quit smoking through the 6-month 
follow-up, but relapsed between the 6- and 12-month follow-ups. 
At the final 12-month follow-up completed by these three indi-
viduals, all considered their psilocybin experiences to have been 
personally meaningful and spiritually significant, and none con-
sidered their experiences in the study to have decreased their 
well-being or life satisfaction in any way (see Johnson et  al., 
2016).
Prior experiences of smoking
Participants were asked about their relationship to smoking before 
they enrolled in the treatment study. For five participants (402, 
403, 406, 416 and 424), smoking was described as offering a 
space, time and means for experiencing and transforming emo-
tions. As Participant 402 explained, ‘You would just reach for it [a 
cigarette] whenever without thinking really. If you felt…any emo-
tion at all.’ Four individuals described smoking as an unthinking 
and compulsive habit, often tied to an earlier era when smoking 
was common (participants 403, 410, 417 and 421). In another 
three cases, smoking was considered a central facet of partici-
pants’ self-identities (participants 402, 405 and 406).
A sub-theme that emerged regarding six participants’ prior 
experiences with smoking was its ability to produce strong feel-
ings of connection. For participants 402, 422 and 427, cigarettes 
were described as ‘friends’ that offered a sense of solace or com-
panionship. For instance,
Table 1.  Demographic and smoking characteristics at treatment study 
intake, N = 12.
Categories
Mean (SD)
Range
Sexa
7 M, 5 F
 
Age (years) at Interview
54 (11.1)
31–67
Educationa
---Some college
3 (25.0)
–
---Bachelor’s degree
7 (58.3)
–
---Graduate degree
2 (16.7)
–
Cigarette dependence (FTCD)b
5.1 (1.0)
3–6
Years smoking
31 (10.6)
10–49
Cigarettes per day
18 (2.4)
15–22
Previous quit attempts
7 (3.7)
3–12
FTCD: Fagerström Test for Cigarette Dependence; SD: standard deviation.
aMean (SD) does not apply to sex or to education. Educational achievement is 
represented as n (%) of total study sample.
bFagerström Test for Cigarette Dependence (Fagerström, 2012; Heatherton, 1991). 
Possible scores on the FTCD range from 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating 
greater dependence.


4	
Journal of Psychopharmacology 00(0)
There was one point where I got so sad, where I realised, ‘oh 
my God, these cigarettes are my friends’, and it made me 
really depressed to think about it that way (Participant 402).
Participant 406 described his connection to cigarettes as stronger 
than his spousal relationships. Four participants (402, 405, 410 
and 417) reported smoking as a way of connecting with other 
people. For participants 405 and 417, resuming smoking after 
attempts at quitting was explicitly tied to seeking connection 
with people with whom participants used to smoke – for 
Participant 417, this connection was with his late father:
[When] I initially started smoking again, it was really in 
relating to my dad…it was part of our relationship, in very 
connecting ways. And I think I wanted that connection.
Psilocybin-related factors contributing to 
smoking cessation
Psilocybin session experiences were perceived as an essential 
factor contributing to smoking cessation for the 11 participants 
who quit smoking at the TQD. All 11 participants reported gain-
ing profound insights into their self-identity or smoking behav-
iour. Themes of interconnectedness, awe, and curiosity were 
identified as additional features of psilocybin sessions that helped 
participants quit smoking. Finally, all participants who success-
fully quit after their TQD reported marked post-session reduc-
tions in cigarette withdrawal symptoms in comparison with 
previous quit attempts.
Insights into self-identity.  Seven of the 12 participants (402, 
405, 406, 410, 416, 424 and 427) reported valuable insights into 
their understanding of themselves occurring during their psilocy-
bin experiences that were directly relevant to their efforts to quit 
smoking. Session experiences were described as revealing a 
deeper, better, or more essential self that either led to a decreased 
desire to smoke, or to smoking not making sense anymore. These 
psilocybin-occasioned insights into self-identity were reported 
by all of the five female interview participants, while only two of 
the seven male participants.
For instance, Participant 427 described seeing a beautiful 
‘Technicolor’ vine rising during her second psilocybin session:
I used to hide sitting on the air conditioning unit on the side 
of my house, when I used to smoke. And so the image was 
me sitting there, smoking, all hunched over, stupid, smoking. 
And the vine just rising up and this purply flower face thing 
looking down at me like, ‘how ridiculous!’ And then I’m not 
really that [person], I’m really this vine, that’s really me, and 
the Goddess within me…how silly to think that [smoking]…
was going to do anything or solve anything. So it was really 
just that rising up feeling, and that powerful feeling, and it 
just filled me with such beauty and strength and life.
She described this experience as reawakening an inner power that 
she had lost touch with since her youth some two decades prior. 
The experience produced a sense of strength and beauty that 
revealed smoking to be incongruous with the person she ‘really’ 
was.
Participant 402 reported coming to a profound realization 
during her second psilocybin session that smoking did not have 
to define who she was:
For a few seconds, it was just like ‘I’m me, and there are no 
defining characteristics!’… that made me realise that I’m not 
a ‘smoker’.
In Participant 405’s first session, she described encountering a 
powerfully agential ‘goddess’ figure whom she watched, admired 
and finally came to realise was an aspect of herself. By the end of 
her sessions, she explained,
It felt like I’d died as a smoker and was resurrected as a non-
smoker. Because it’s my perception of myself, and that’s how 
I felt. So I jumped up and I said ‘I’m not a smoker anymore, 
it’s all done’.
Participant 406 described ending his second session ‘emerging 
out of a cocoon’, shaking out a pair of ‘magnificent wings’. He 
interpreted this as
me revealing myself, like actually showing myself to the 
world. This is who I am, this is who I really am.
Similarly, Participant 410 said she felt the session experiences 
brought out her ‘better side’, and that to smoke would be to undo 
that work.
Among five participants (405, 410, 413, 417 and 427), psilo-
cybin-related insights into self-identity were characterised by a 
sense of reconnecting with core values that had in some way 
faded over the years. These included acknowledging the impor-
tance of health, breathing, taking breaks, and affirmation of the 
beauty and simplicity of existence. Such core values were con-
trasted with learning something new. For instance, Participant 
410 reflected,
Did I learn anything new? Have I done anything totally 
different than I ever did before? No! But I’m sort of going 
back into my…earlier life when I probably was a better 
person, to be honest with you.
Similarly, Participant 427 remarked,
I don’t know if I really learned – it was more like letting back 
in stuff that I had blocked out?… I don’t think I changed my 
values, just remembered more of them. Or just remembered to 
honour them more, or…allow them more.
Insights into smoking behaviour.  Seven participants (402, 
405, 406, 413, 416, 424 and 427) reported specific smoking-
related insights during psilocybin sessions that they perceived as 
helpful for quitting. Four participants (405, 406, 416 and 424) 
described insights revealing how anxiety and fear contributed to 
their smoking. Participant 405 remarked, ‘I realised that my 
health problems today are due to chronic anxiety.’ Participant 
406 reported his session experiences brought to light the constant 
‘clutter’ he carried around in his mind, and believed this insight 
helped him gain clarity as to why he smoked. Participant 416 


Noorani et al.	
5
reported recalling memories of childhood abuse during her psilo-
cybin sessions, which she had not previously dealt with therapeu-
tically, and which she believed were directly responsible for her 
smoking and other self-destructive behaviours.
Participants 402 and 427 both described realising that smok-
ing even one cigarette entailed an ongoing commitment to smok-
ing. A specific image from her first session led Participant 402 to 
the insight that to smoke at all was to be ‘a smoker’:
It was me in the red coat, lighting up a cigarette, and then it 
spread into a grid. So it was like that one cigarette was 1000 
cigarettes.
Similarly, participant 427 explained,
Cigarettes don’t seem like a short-term solution anymore. They 
seem exhausting to me. Like…oh my god – just, having a 
cigarette now and opening up this whole thing all over again?! 
To have one cigarette would be a long-term commitment.
Experiences of interconnectedness.  Eight participants (403, 
405, 406, 410, 413, 417, 422 and 424) described experiencing a 
profound sense of unity and interconnectedness during their psi-
locybin session experiences.1 Participant 417 described this 
experience of interconnectedness during a session as evoking a 
strong sense of peace:
I approached the border where existence began, and on the 
other side of this border was nothing… there was no 
beginning, no end, no nothing…I think that’s really rare and it 
would be healing to humanity for us to open to those roots, 
and to our connectedness with everything, and each other in a 
brotherly, sister kinda way.
Participant 405 described a unitive feeling of love for everything 
around her:
I was in love with everything. In love with the couch, in love 
with the whole room, the people in it … Love is a pretty big 
distraction from addiction and … my attention kept going 
back to it, that great feeling of love and acceptance.
For two participants (410 and 424), experiences of interconnect-
edness recast smoking as an act of harming or contaminating the 
purity of the universe. For instance, Participant 410 explained,
I had always had the sense of everything being connected. 
And [the psilocybin session] reinforced that, very strongly…
[If I were to smoke] I would be a polluter…ashtrays and 
butts all over the place, and you’re causing harm to other 
people’s health as well. And so you were re-looking at your 
place in the universe and what you were doing to help or 
hinder it. The universe as such. And by smoking, you 
wouldn’t be helping.
Similarly, Participant 424 remarked, ‘Your body or your “vessel” 
is supposed to be treated much like the way you’re supposed to 
treat people or the Earth, and you shouldn’t be contaminating that 
with cigarettes.’
Sustained feelings of awe and curiosity.  Six participants 
(403, 406, 413, 417, 422 and 427) reported that the profound sig-
nificance of the psilocybin session experiences made smoking 
seem trivial in comparison.2 These participants described psilo-
cybin sessions as evoking a powerful, sustained sense of awe and 
a lingering curiosity into unsolvable life mysteries, all of which 
diminished the relative importance of smoking. For example, 
Participant 413 described his experience during one session as,
...beyond what I have ever been to or any place I ever thought 
about going to…I was just totally inundated, mentally and 
emotionally, by that experience. So the smoking was like, 
‘who cares!’, you know? Somewhere that’s so special and so 
unique and it’s shown me so much in such a brief period of 
time…[after that] smoking is not important anymore!
Participant 417 described his session experiences as a ‘jubilation 
in the preciousness of existence’ that rendered quitting smoking 
‘not a big deal’ in relation to a greatly expanded awareness of 
what ‘is’. He felt subsequent withdrawal symptoms and cravings 
were ‘more quizzical than burdensome’, prompting him to exam-
ine his cravings, and life in general, with greater curiosity.
Participant 427 stated that after her second session,
…smoking just seemed like this miniscule flick of the – pshh, 
like that, it was nothing compared to everything that I was 
feeling and thinking, and it was all coming together in this 
holistic picture of everything, past, present and future. And 
smoking – whatever! – like just so pointless, it’s just nothing 
to do with anything. Like a little pebble in your shoe – just 
brush it off and then you… you know, the world is so much 
bigger!
Participants 403 and 422 also described how lingering contem-
plative, philosophical questions emerging from session experi-
ences became associated with the goal of stopping smoking, 
displacing any thoughts of withdrawal or cravings. For instance, 
Participant 422 described a joyous curiosity that superseded the 
desire to smoke:
It was all about searching for answers to questions that are 
age-old. Maybe we have the answer to some of it, maybe 
we’ll never have the answer to it. But none of it had to do with 
addiction to cigarettes. It all had to do with stretching space 
and time, and asking questions like, ‘Why is there something 
rather than nothing?’ And, ‘What happened before the Big 
Bang?’… All those things that had nothing, absolutely 
nothing – at least in the conscious thinking of it – with 
stopping smoking.…every time I think of a cigarette, it brings 
me back to the three sessions of the psilocybin trip, where 
you’re trying to ask questions that there may not be answers 
to. So, that’s more fun than smoking!
Reduced withdrawal and cravings.  The first psilocybin session 
was followed by marked reduction in the reported intensity and 
frequency of withdrawal symptoms for 11 of the 12 participants 
when compared with their previous experiences attempting to quit 
smoking. These individuals went on to maintain abstinence 
between their first and second psilocybin sessions. In contrast, the 


6	
Journal of Psychopharmacology 00(0)
remaining participant (424) reported similar withdrawal symp-
toms after his first psilocybin session as compared with previous 
quit attempts,3 and went on to have several smoking lapses prior 
to his second psilocybin session.
Of the 11 participants reporting reduced withdrawal symp-
toms, seven reported no symptoms whatsoever, whereas the 
remaining 4 of the 11 participants (402, 405, 422 and 427) expe-
rienced significantly attenuated symptoms. In all 11 participants, 
changes in withdrawal symptoms as compared with previous quit 
attempts were attributed to their ongoing reflection on the psilo-
cybin sessions and contemplation of the session contents. For 
example,
I have smoked for a number of years, and I have attempted to 
quit on numerous occasions, and I always would go through 
withdrawal. I didn’t with psilocybin…I didn’t wake up in the 
middle of the night [after the session], I slept like a log. My 
mind was preoccupied with the psilocybin experience, so, it 
[withdrawal] didn’t really affect me. (Participant 413)
I was so confused about where my withdrawals left off and 
how much of this is just excitement from the aftermath of this 
intense psychedelic experience. Nothing was perceived as 
bad, it was all interesting as hell! (Participant 405)
Every time I think I craved the cigarette I had to tell myself 
why I’m doing this, and remind myself that there’s a lot riding 
on this. And [then] I would occupy myself with things, and 
think about the trip we just had. Because it was so 
overwhelming. Yeah. You know when you’re so close to it 
you could just pull it right up! (Participant 422)
The affective quality of the first psilocybin session appeared to 
play a key role in mediating participant withdrawal. The first 
psilocybin sessions of ten participants were characterised by gen-
erally positive mood and overall tone, and 9 of these individuals 
(402, 403, 405, 406, 410, 413, 417, 421 and 422) did not experi-
ence overwhelming cravings or withdrawal symptoms after their 
first psilocybin sessions. The tenth participant (424) who had a 
positive first session was an exception, experiencing normal 
withdrawal and reporting smoking after his psilocybin session.
By contrast, the two participants whose first psilocybin ses-
sions were generally negative in mood and tone reported wanting 
to smoke immediately afterwards.4 Participant 416’s session 
experience brought up painful childhood memories, and she 
reflected that had she not had support through regular check-ins 
from the study team, she would have smoked in order to cope. 
Participant 427 described how she struggled to fully surrender to 
her first psilocybin experience, feeling that she had ‘failed’ to 
approach the session correctly, preceding two weeks of painful, 
difficult abstinence before her second session.
Non-psilocybin factors contributing to 
smoking cessation
Participants endorsed several elements of the overall study treat-
ment as crucial factors in supporting their success in smoking 
cessation. These included the preparatory counselling, rapport 
with the study team, a sense of momentum gained after giving up 
smoking for the 8-hour duration of the first psilocybin session, 
and their therapeutic intent in entering the study. These factors 
were largely viewed by participants as working synergistically 
with one another and with the psilocybin sessions, to create a 
coherent therapeutic structure that fostered ongoing success over 
and above what any of these elements in isolation would be able 
to achieve.
Preparatory counselling.  The initial four weeks of preparation 
and counselling were regarded as important by all participants. 
More specifically, seven participants (417, 421, 413, 427, 410, 
406 and 416) cited the mantra (a brief, self-generated mission 
statement encompassing key motivations to quit smoking) as a 
major factor in quitting. Participants were encouraged to repeat 
their mantra during times of stress or craving after the TQD. For 
example, Participant 421’s mantra was, ‘For the love of life, I 
will quit forever.’
Six participants (402, 410, 416, 403, 421 and 427) found that 
keeping a smoking diary enhanced awareness of their smoking 
behaviour, with one individual (Participant 421) speculating that 
this alone may have been sufficient to get him to quit smoking. 
Five of the 12 participants (402, 403, 413, 410 and 416) cited the 
scented oil as a useful way to recall the study and the research 
team when craving cigarettes. Two participants (405 and 413) 
remarked that during the preparatory CBT, it was helpful to con-
sider that their identities were not fixed as ‘smokers’, because this 
reframed their relationship to cigarettes in ways that were later 
reinforced, or ‘cemented’ (405), during the psilocybin sessions.
Rapport with study team.  All participants recognised the 
importance of trusting and developing rapport with their session 
guides as necessary preparation for navigating experiences in 
psilocybin sessions. Moreover, ten participants (403, 405, 406, 
410, 413, 417, 421, 422, 424 and 427) identified rapport with the 
study team during the preparatory counselling as a crucial factor 
in stopping smoking. Participant 406 remarked, ‘it’s not just the 
psilocybin sessions [but] it’s that human connection, and the sup-
port that comes with that human connection, that ultimately leads 
to success at the end of the day.’
Ten of the 12 participants reported being very comfortable 
around their guides by the time of the first psilocybin session. The 
two who did not (participants 402 and 424) were markedly 
younger than the other participants, in their 20s and 30s 
respectively.
Eight participants viewed the guides as vital for ensuring the 
safety and usefulness of their psilocybin experiences (402, 403, 
406, 413, 416, 417, 421 and 427). Participants variously described 
their guides as ‘co-creators’ of the session experiences (Participant 
417), ‘advisors’ (Participant 403), and as ‘looking after me, mak-
ing sure I was safe. So no matter how scary it was, I always knew 
that it was a drug that was doing it’ (Participant 406).
Eleven of 12 participants (all except Participant 402) described 
a deepening of their relationship with the guides as a result of their 
involvement in the psilocybin sessions. For example,
The bonding is significant…I wouldn’t smoke cos I wouldn’t 
wanna hurt their feelings. It actually got that deep. (Participant 
413)


Noorani et al.	
7
Participant 406, who temporarily lapsed one month after his sec-
ond session, explained,
When I did have [my first] cigarette, the first thing that came 
in my mind was how I was letting Mary and Matt down. So 
yeah absolutely, there’s definitely a connection there.
Two participants (410 and 422) singled out the rapport with the 
study team as the single most important factor in their successful 
quit attempts. Participant 410 described the rapport as non-judge-
mental care and understanding throughout her study involve-
ment. For Participant 422,
I think if you didn’t have that [the rapport] I'm not sure if it 
would work. I don’t know. And then the trust with the people, 
the folks in this clearly – when you know that people want 
you to do well…want this to work for you…and then you 
don’t want to let them down. Because there’s so much 
invested.
Momentum.  By the end of the initial psilocybin session day, 
participants had been abstinent for upwards of eight hours, creat-
ing a sense of momentum towards long-term abstinence. This 
was perceived as important for four participants (402, 410, 413 
and 427) in their efforts to maintain their abstinence. Once the 
first session was over, they reported wanting to keep the momen-
tum going, both having not smoked for a whole day, and knowing 
that they needed to remain abstinent for at least four consecutive 
days in the next two weeks in order to undergo the next treatment 
session. For example, Participant 413 explained,
I was very eager to do the second session, cos the first session 
was very interesting to me, personally. And I did not want to 
jeopardise that by smoking again, so that was part of my 
impetus. (Participant 413)
The only reason I didn’t [smoke after my first session] was 
because I had a second session – I had to hold on for 2 weeks, 
otherwise they were like, ‘if you smoke, you can’t come back 
for the second session’. So if I didn’t have the sessions, I think 
I would have been like, well this counseling has been great, 
but… I don’t know if it really would have lasted, you know? 
(Participant 427)
Therapeutic intent.  During interviews, three participants spon-
taneously observed that without the appropriate therapeutic 
intent, psilocybin session experiences could have paradoxically 
led them to continue smoking (405, 417 and 422). For these indi-
viduals, their success in smoking cessation was seen as predi-
cated on a clear intention to quit as they went into the psilocybin 
sessions. As Participant 417 explained:
The sessions would not have caused me to quit in and of itself 
– in fact, just the opposite…the experience provides a 
perspective that in a way makes trivial much of the meanings 
that we normally engage in everyday existence…including 
smoking! It was like, it doesn’t really matter.
Similarly, Participant 422 suggested,
The logical extension of the melancholy [during the psilocybin 
session] is that I should go out and smoke again…because this 
is all there is. See, there is a dichotomy there. I haven’t gone 
to the other side. But that is the logical extension of that train 
of thought.
Reflections on the research protocol
Addictiveness of psilocybin.  Participants were asked whether 
they thought psilocybin might be addictive in a manner similar to 
tobacco. All 12 participants unequivocally stated that they 
believed psilocybin was not addictive, finding no similarity 
between the addictive nature of cigarette smoking and their expe-
riences during psilocybin sessions. For example,
There is no comparison. One is an addiction. The other is, um, 
psilocybin...I don’t know how to describe it. But it’s almost a 
therapeutic journey. An inner journey. (Participant 422)
Four participants (403, 406, 413 and 421) expressed an interest in 
undergoing further psilocybin experiences, but only under super-
vised and legal circumstances, whereas a fifth (Participant 417) 
remained ambivalent to such a prospect. All those expressing an 
openness to further psilocybin experiences were male. Another 
two participants (402 and 405) described not having the time for 
regular psilocybin experiences even if they were made available. 
The five remaining participants reported not wanting to experi-
ence psilocybin again.
Psilocybin session music.  The music was perceived as central 
to all 12 participants’ psilocybin experiences. Participant 427 
explained,
You’re lying there and you have headphones on and your eyes 
are covered and there’s nothing to see… So all you had was 
the music. And so the music was melding with what I was 
feeling, and it was all mixing up to create images in my 
mind…the music was the whole script, the whole movie, the 
whole everything.
The agential character of the music in the psilocybin sessions 
also emerged in several participant accounts. For example, 
Participant 416 remarked, ‘The music was alive!’ while 
Participant 405 stated, ‘I was in love with the music. But I felt 
like it was [also] in love with me. That’s a great feeling.’ Six 
participants (403, 405, 413, 416, 421 and 424) reported that cer-
tain musical pieces from the sessions still overwhelmed them 
with positive emotions whenever they heard them, even at the 
time of interview an average of 30 months post-TQD.
Meaning-making across sessions.  Participants were asked if 
one session stood out as the most significant. Nine of the 12 
participants indicated an order of significance. Amongst them, 
six participants identified their second session as the most sig-
nificant (402, 403, 406, 416, 424 and 427), two identified their 
third session as the most significant (417 and 421), and one 
identified the first and third sessions as equally significant 
(413). No participants identified the first session as the single 
most significant.5


8	
Journal of Psychopharmacology 00(0)
Interview data suggest mechanisms for how the significance 
of experiences may build over the course of multiple psilocybin 
sessions. Six participants described insights unfolding across 
psilocybin sessions, rather than being confined to a single session 
(participants 405, 406, 410, 417, 424 and 427). Participant 417 
described becoming more relaxed and comfortable from his first 
to third session, and learning how to better navigate psilocybin 
experiences:
There was an increasing opening at each experience…[in] 
the very first one, I remember feeling turbulence as it 
started and holding hands with one of the guides. You 
know cos I was feeling nauseous and ungrounded. And it 
didn’t last long, maybe two, three minutes…The third one, 
I just went!…I do think that whatever happens, at least 
from a consciousness standpoint, for me did expand and 
become deeper, in this progression. I do think familiarity 
somehow…once you’ve had it, you’re just more 
comfortable with it.
In some cases participants intentionally worked to prepare for 
subsequent sessions after encountering the psychological mate-
rial raised in the first session. Participant 406 described his two 
sessions unfolding like successive chapters in a ‘hero’s journey’ 
(Campbell et al. 1990). In his first session he described seeing 
faces in clouds everywhere he looked, which he turned away 
from, terrified. At the time he found little meaning in this difficult 
experience. Afterwards, he explained:
I actually sat down and meditated, for a week, with the 
intention of ‘I’m going to face up to these images’… [In] 
the second session there were faces coming at me, but I 
looked at them. So I actually saw the face coming and these 
– all these scary faces that just turned out to be nothing… 
Even when I looked at the photos of my kids it would be a 
demon starting, and then it would just dissipate… At the 
end of that session, I felt like a butterfly. Very clearly, there 
was this whole experience of me coming out of a cocoon. 
And actually shaking my wings out, like [makes whooshing 
noise]…just shaking out these massive big wings. Yeah, it 
was crazy!…it felt like taking a scalpel to every incident in 
my life where I had been hurt, or caused hurt…[and] opened 
up every one of those wounds. It was crazy, it was so 
relieving. It was like this whole thing had just like [makes 
whooshing noise, conveying a release] off me. It was 
powerful!
Support from session guides was also considered important in 
meaning-making across session experiences. After Participant 
427 had a challenging first psilocybin experience where she 
described feeling ‘manipulated’ by the music and then frustrated 
that she had ‘wasted’ her session, she was reminded in her debrief 
by her guides to ‘go with’ the experience the next time, using 
breathing techniques whenever necessary. Entering her second 
session with much trepidation, she recalled a moment early in the 
session when she breathed out deliberately and a guide said 
‘good’. The participant reported feeling validated by this, and 
that this launched her into a profoundly positive and highly 
meaningful experience, after which she remained abstinent with 
relative ease.
Effects beyond smoking
Quitting smoking was often reported as one of the least important 
effects of the study for participants in retrospect. As Participant 
405 put it,
This is about a smoking study, I keep forgetting that. Because 
there’s so much more that happened… [Smoking] just seems 
so petty compared to some of the stuff that was happening.
Table 2 highlights other persisting long-term changes identified 
through interviews. In general, all participants reported that psilo-
cybin sessions led to long-term changes in thoughts, affects, 
desires or behaviours at an average of 30 months post-TQD. These 
can broadly be categorised into two domains: increased aesthetic 
appreciation, and heightened altruism and pro-social attitudes.
Aesthetic appreciation.  Six participants in this study reported 
an ongoing enhancement of their sense of aesthetic appreciation 
and natural wonder. For example, since involvement in the study, 
Participant 410 reported buying 15 books of poetry, something 
she had not done for years prior to her psilocybin sessions. Partici-
pant 403 began working with a visual artist to recreate mental 
images from his psilocybin experiences. Participants 410 and 413 
described taking up musical hobbies such as playing instruments.
Participants also described integrating some key images from 
psilocybin into their everyday lives. Participant 427 reported 
ongoing use of an adaptation of her mantra that she devised with 
her children, reminding each other to breathe during stressful 
situations – to ‘smell the flowers and blow out the candle’.
Discussing the ongoing impact of the psilocybin sessions, 
Participant 424 explained,
Yesterday was kinda cloudy and a little overcast, and I was 
driving home and there was this one small patch of clouds that 
was lit up bright by the sun, and it was all surrounded by these 
dark clouds. And I was like, ‘that’s amazing’… And then I 
caught that, because prior to the psilocybin I probably would 
never have noticed that. But, I’m always on the lookout for 
those kinds of things. So yeah, that’s a pretty good example of 
me being more aware.
Altruism and pro-social effects.  In addition, participants 
described greater openness to altruistic and pro-social activities. 
For instance, Participant 410 described her increased involve-
ment in volunteering since her study participation:
I’ve been involved with the local literacy council all the time 
now … And then the other thing is I’ve become very involved 
with this environmental group as well … instead of sitting 
around and just watching television and smoking and doing 
nothing, I’m putting all this extra time I have to good use. Cos 
that was one thing about smoking, was the amount of time 
you wasted!
Similarly, Participant 421 reflected:
I like being this way, and…I just think it just opened my mind 
to maybe more possibilities of stuff? I don’t know. I’m not 
real deep, I’m not like this meditative guy… I’ve always been 


Noorani et al.	
9
very considerate, opening doors…but now I’m even more of 
that, too. Gentlemanly. Lot more ‘thank you’s’… I just feel 
good all the time… I’m not in a big rush. It just takes another 
second to hold the door, say thank you, or give up my seat on 
the train. So, I do all that, and it just makes me feel good. I’ve 
always been nice, but now I feel like I’m…really nice! 
[laughter] And I can blame that on the psilocybin.
Along these lines, 11 participants reported the psilocybin ses-
sions broadly affected their sense of interconnected within them-
selves, with others and the world. For some, this translated to 
more explicitly pro-social attitudes towards people in general. 
Regarding the way her psilocybin experience affected her view 
of humanity, Participant 410 said,
I’ve always in the past, despite my temper and everything 
else, [tried] to see and believe the good in everybody. [And] 
failed, of course sometimes, but when I was ‘under the 
influence’ [of psilocybin] I suppose you could say, I could see 
that everybody was essentially good.
Future research
Participants were asked to provide suggestions based on their 
experience for possible future research with psychedelics. 
Participants 402 and 427 reported that their study experiences 
helped them overcome an underlying sadness driving their 
smoking habits, and suggested research with psilocybin for con-
ditions characterised by feelings of sadness such as grief or 
depression.
Regarding the research space and protocol, participants were in 
general very satisfied with their experiences. However, partici-
pants did recommend making the study space less ‘office-like’ 
(Participant 406), more ‘zen-like’ (Participant 417), and including 
natural light if possible (Participant 402). Participants also made 
various suggestions on the session music, including spending more 
time tailoring the music to each participant (Participant 410), 
allowing space for periods of silence (Participant 417) and incor-
porating more ‘repetitive harmonics’ (Participant 422).
Finally, participants 403, 421 and 424 suggested restructuring 
the period immediately after the psilocybin sessions to reduce the 
obligation to describe experiences to researchers verbally and 
through questionnaires, until participants have time to think 
about and better articulate what they experienced.
In addition, Participant 424 described feeling uncomfortable 
with the degree of ‘ritual’ involved in the psilocybin sessions, 
singling out in particular the chalice that contained the psilocybin 
pill and the large crystal glass of water. In contrast, participants 
422 and 405 explicitly commended the use of ritual in construct-
ing a therapeutic container.
Discussion
This qualitative analysis of participant accounts of psilocybin-
facilitated treatment for smoking cessation identifies several per-
ceived mechanisms of change requiring further investigation and 
elucidation. It should be noted that there may be appreciable 
overlap between the mechanisms presented here, as psilocybin 
was administered in the context of a structured treatment.
Regarding their psilocybin experiences, participants reported 
powerful insights into self-identity and smoking behaviours that 
in turn diminished desire to smoke. Experiences of interconnect-
edness, awe and curiosity, and positive affect persisting beyond 
the period of acute drug action attenuated subsequent withdrawal 
and craving to smoke. Non-drug mechanisms participants cited 
as useful for smoking cessation included preparatory CBT, which 
helped participants gain a greater awareness of their smoking 
habits (e.g. through use of a smoking diary) and explore their 
motivations to smoke through counselling. Preparatory counsel-
ling facilitated development of a strong rapport and trust in ses-
sion guides that was viewed as integral to maintaining a sense of 
safety during psilocybin sessions, and ultimately to quitting 
smoking. Furthermore, the study treatment design, which neces-
sitated an 8–10 hour period of smoking abstinence during the 
first psilocybin session on the TQD, provided an initial sense of 
momentum toward long-term abstinence.
Participants’ perceptions of their smoking habits in the period 
leading up to the study revealed the complex roles cigarette 
smoking played in their lives, oftentimes woven into their  previ-
ous self-identities as smokers. For the majority of participants, 
the study treatment elicited insights into their self-identity and 
smoking behaviour that resulted in smoking no longer being 
appealing or congruent with their previous senses of self, consist-
ent with previous literature (Belser et al., 2017; Bogenschutz and 
Pommy, 2012; Swift et al., 2017). In particular, the psychological 
insights reported in this study highlight the epistemic potential of 
psilocybin-facilitated experiences embedded within a structured 
therapeutic intervention. Moreover, these insights were in several 
cases not radically ‘new’, but largely seen as a ‘returning’ or 
‘remembering’ of something that was in some sense already 
known to participants (compare with Sedgwick, 2003). Similarly, 
recent qualitative findings on psilocybin-assisted therapy in can-
cer patients reported reconnecting with long-held core values and 
beliefs as insights that helped reduce anxiety (Swift et al., 2017).
Persisting feelings of interconnectedness, awe, and curiosity 
had a direct bearing on smoking cessation outcomes. These qual-
ities of participant psilocybin experiences correspond to several 
criteria of the mystical-type experience, which has been charac-
terised by dimensions of unity and interconnectedness, sacred-
ness or awe, noesis, transcendence of time and space, deeply felt 
positive mood, ineffability, and paradoxicality (Pahnke, 1969; 
Pahnke and Richards, 1966; Stace, 1960). Three interviewees 
specifically endorsed psilocybin experiences in occasioning 
smoking cessation, but insisted they must be linked to an explicit 
therapeutic structure and intention to be efficacious.
Participants reported that feelings of interconnectedness 
experienced in the study, and in psilocybin sessions, overshad-
owed prior feelings of connectedness to cigarette smoking. These 
experiences also appeared to carry forward to participants’ lives 
after the study, and to extend beyond smoking to include persist-
ing connection to loved ones and to the world at large (compare 
with recent findings by Watts et al., 2017). Related to intercon-
nectedness, sub-themes of purity and contamination were also 
highlighted, and may be useful to incorporate into the prepara-
tory sessions of future psychedelic-facilitated addiction treat-
ment. Together these findings highlight unity as the hallmark of 
the mystical experience (Pahnke and Richards, 1966), and bring 
to mind the observation that, ‘The opposite of addiction isn’t 
sobriety. It’s connection’ (Hari, 2015, p. 293). 


10	
Journal of Psychopharmacology 00(0)
Table 2.  Participants’ current smoking status and non-smoking-related persisting effects attributed to psilocybin session experiences.
402
Smoking status
Not smoking, aside from occasional cigarette at party: A few short lapses in first six months post-TQD,a 
including one week of smoking between six months and one year (following relationship breakup)
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Identity: ‘Primarily I would say it made me understand that my identity is this construct’
 
Self time: ‘[Now I am] always making time in my day to just go for a walk or something like that’
403
Smoking status
Not smoking: No lapses
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Gratitude: ‘I’ve learned how to be more grateful, which is probably the biggest thing’
 
Nature: ‘Being outdoors is much more important…I spend a lot of time outdoors now’
 
Breathing: ‘Being more conscious of breath is something that I experienced after the study’
405
Smoking status
Smoking: Started again 3 years and 3 months after TQD (approximately 8 months before interview) after 
death of brother, though intends to quit again soon (with friend who is pregnant)
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Consciousness augmentation: ‘I can get deeper into different states of consciousness just by meditation, breath 
work’
 
Relationship: ‘[M]y relationship with my mother has improved. It’s been a turbulent process, but that’s what 
was necessary. But if I look back at how our relationship is now compared to how it was 5 years ago, it's so 
much better…it’s so much better’
 
Habits: ‘[A]nother side effect is I don’t watch TV any more. I like to pick and choose what I put in my head’
 
Depression insight: ‘I was given all these lessons in that session telling me, “here’s what you need to do so you 
don’t get depressed”‘
406
Smoking status
Not smoking: Lapsed 6 weeks after TQD and continued smoking for 2 years and 10 months before 
quitting again approximately 6 months before interview with a distinct sense of connection to the ease 
with which he quit on the TQD
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Living in the present: ‘In trying to live in the present, there are a lot of gremlins that force you to live in the 
past!… But I think that those sessions took a lot of those gremlins away, helped me put those gremlins into 
the present, into present context as well. I think that was a really big changing point in my life’
 
Psychological ‘baggage’: ‘The first session, there was the insight that I was carrying a lot of shit around in my 
head. The second was like that insight of…I didn’t need to be carrying that shit around with me. So there was 
a big shift in who I was between the first session and after’
 
Authenticity: ‘[It was] me revealing myself, actually showing myself to the world. This is who I am, this is who 
I really am…[it] was just a really powerful experience’
410
Smoking status
Not smoking: No lapses
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Parents’ expectations: ‘I was just me, I wasn’t my parent’s child. I was me. Yeah! I think finally, I was just 
me, the individual. Not somebody who had to be kowtowing, or think about what their parent might think or 
whatever’
 
Interconnectedness: ‘[T]he other thing too was the recognition that, that you were just part of something 
greater. Enormously. Vastly. You know, the sort of, the universe’
 
Tolerance: ‘I’m much more tolerant of others…when I was “under the influence” [of psilocybin] I suppose you 
could say, I could see that everybody was essentially good’
 
Prosocial behaviour: ‘I saw all the people that needed help. So I have become involved with the local literacy 
council all the time now…And then the other thing is I’ve become very involved with this environmental group 
as well’
 
Aesthetic appreciation: ‘I must have bought 15 books of poetry since. And I’ve gone to see every major poet 
that has come down to the Library of Congress since then as well’
 
Music: ‘[T]here was music playing, of course, it was that lute-type music. And that’s one of the things I want 
to learn to play, and I actually went in one day recently – well it was almost 6 months ago – to inquire about 
purchasing one of those’
413
Smoking status
Not smoking: No lapses
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Simple life: ‘I would say my life remains and continues to be simpler. My decisions, easier. I’m generally 
happier’
 
Emotions: ‘[I]t kinda made me more emotional’
 
Priorities: ‘I did feel very grounded and filled with common sense, and I thought problems that were problems 
before are no longer problems’
 
Music: ‘[T]he music is like a tour guide for me. That’s something else that I’ve done – I am so into music now!’
416
Smoking status
Not smoking: Lapsed three months before interview after niece suicided, but stopped again 
approximately two months later
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Positive activities: ‘I’m pretty happy now. I cook – I love to cook, I cook a lot’


Noorani et al.	
11
 
Social situations: ‘[A] woman was yelling at me, we’re driving and, beeped her horn… leaned out the window 
yelling at me, and that would bother me a lot before and now I’m thinking well…so what!’
 
Family history: ‘It was a wonderful experience and a terrible experience…during the three sessions I found out 
I’d been abused as a child’ [Note: the ultimate veracity of this memory is unknown to the researchers]
417
Smoking status
Not smoking: No lapses
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Awe: ‘Seeing that which happened during the psilocybin experiences and being reminded of, and 
understanding, life as an unspeakably marvelous adventure of existence’
 
Preciousness of existence: ‘It was definitely…an exploration and tangible attunedness to the possibilities of 
being human and just how fortunate it is to be!…There was a preciousness to the fact that [the Universe] is’
421
Smoking status
Not smoking: No lapses
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Emotions: ‘I feel much deeper into everything now, everything I see and do. I react differently to everything’
 
Aesthetics and nature: ‘I can go back and remember how it felt. And it kinda gives me a little…charge? And 
it could be a little charge of psilocybin maybe, or whatever they wanna call it. It’s not a flashback, I’m not 
seeing colours but, it just gives me a like a little “ooh”, like “oh yeah, that sun is pretty nice right there.” So 
yeah, I get a little residue when I look at the sunset or the rainbow.’
 
Prosocial behaviour: ‘I’ve always been nice, but now I feel like I’m…really nice. [laughter] And I can blame that 
on the psilocybin’
422
Smoking status
Not smoking: No lapses
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Self-acceptance: ‘I’m more accepting of myself’
 
Honesty and openness: ‘I’ve become a lot more honest with myself and a lot more open about things, and 
people’
 
Simplicity: ‘[T]he after-effect I think is almost more important than the actual trip itself… I think one of the 
things that is so fascinating is that there’s so much we don’t know about ourselves. But when you get to a 
certain point, it becomes so simple’
 
Authenticity: ‘One of the things that happened to me that was important was the magnification of how 
important it was to be true to yourself and have integrity about it’
424
Smoking status
Smoking: Lapsed and returned to chronic smoking a few days after first psilocybin session
 
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Self-appraisal and anxiety: ‘[T]he self-defeating talk is gone, the extremely negative talk is gone, the 
depression [and] the anxiety is gone, the sleeplessness is gone … I learned just to be me. And that it’s ok to 
be me. I learned that I’m gonna make mistakes and everybody makes mistakes’
 
Aesthetics and nature: ‘Prior to the psilocybin I probably would never have noticed [an ‘amazing’ sky]. But 
[now], I'm always on the lookout for those kinds of things’
 
Gratitude: ‘The wanting for a better life and knowing I can have a better life is there, gratitude is exceptionally 
high. I used to not like my life, and now I really love my life’
 
Death: ‘I’m not afraid of death anymore, at all. I wouldn’t say I look forward to it, but I’m not afraid of it 
happening. I know that everything’s gonna be ok’
427
Smoking status
Not smoking: No lapses
Non-smoking-related 
effects
Integrated self: ‘It affected my whole life. It affected me, seeing my image of myself, and who I was a long 
time ago when I was at college and I had no kids. And then who I’d become, as a mom… It’s just kinda like, 
this is who I am now, and it’s all part of the same ball of me – it’s all integrated. There wasn’t a bad me and a 
good me. So, allowing all of it was really helpful’
 
Self-efficacy: ‘…it was that rising up feeling, and that powerful feeling, and it just filled me with such beauty 
and strength and life and it was just really good, a really strong feeling’
aTQD = target-quit date.
Table 2. (Continued)
Withdrawal symptoms were consistently described as being 
less frequent and intense after psilocybin sessions as compared 
with participants' previous quit attempts, in line with recent sur-
vey data on psychedelics and smoking cessation (Johnson et al., 
2017). Reduced withdrawal symptoms were attributed directly to 
psilocybin experiences, supporting prior hypotheses to this effect 
(Bogenschutz and Pommy, 2012). This study further suggests 
contemplation of psilocybin session experiences, and insights 
gained therein, as a mechanism through which withdrawal symp-
toms may be diminished.
Participant responses indicate that the rapport with, and trust 
in, the guides may have interacted with the psilocybin sessions in 
two distinct and complementary ways. First, the degree of trust 
in, and connection with, the session guides may have allowed 
participants to go deeper into their psilocybin experiences with-
out undue fearfulness or restraint. To this our analysis reveals a 
second possible mechanism: profound session experiences can 
deepen participants’ therapeutic alliance with their guides, in turn 
reinforcing smoking abstinence in order not to ‘let the team 
down’ (Participant 422). This may prove significant for future 


12	
Journal of Psychopharmacology 00(0)
trial designs where participant follow-ups are abbreviated, or 
conducted with personnel other than the participant's session 
guides. 
Participants reported a sense of momentum towards absti-
nence gained from the TQD onwards, suggesting the importance 
of acute psilocybin effects may lie, in part, in providing an initial 
supervised period of abstinence to interrupt the habitual cycle of 
drug use. The time interval between first and second psilocybin 
sessions also appears to be important – long enough that partici-
pants are encouraged to remain abstinent to undergo a second 
session, although not so long that participants relapse. The two-
week period between first and second psilocybin sessions in this 
study was an encouragement for three participants to maintain 
abstinence between sessions, suggesting the time interval 
between sessions is an important factor to consider in future 
research.
These findings indicate that the significance of psilocybin 
sessions may increase across sessions, suggesting investigation 
of individual psilocybin session content may be inadequate to 
grasp therapeutic effects occurring across sessions. Moreover, 
the specific content of significant or meaningful experiences – 
for instance, the releasing of personal ‘demons’ (Participant 406), 
re-emergence of traumatic memories (Participant 416), or more 
general distress and discomfort throughout a session (Participant 
427) – signal therapeutic mechanisms distinct from the universal 
qualities posited by the mystical-type experience alone. This 
raises wider questions concerning the potential value of challeng-
ing experiences in psychedelic-facilitated clinical interventions. 
While mystical-type experience may confer therapeutic benefit, 
procedures for maximising the meaningfulness and benefit of 
other types of psilocybin experiences warrant independent 
investigation.
Recent anonymous online survey data from individuals 
endorsing a challenging experience with psilocybin found that 
84% of respondents considered their most psychologically diffi-
cult psilocybin experience to be beneficial in retrospect (Carbonaro 
et  al., 2016). In this study, three participants (406, 416, 427) 
reported acutely challenging experiences that nevertheless were 
associated with subsequent positive outcomes, both through 
focused personal practices such as meditation (Participant 406), 
and skilful support and integration. Future psychedelic research 
may benefit from implementing similar aftercare measures taken 
in the smoking cessation pilot trial, particularly in relation to chal-
lenging experiences. These included daily phone calls or text mes-
sages from study guides (conducted daily for at least a week in the 
smoking cessation trial), development of a written or mixed media 
(e.g. collage, drawing, etc.) session narrative by the participant in 
the days following the session, and systematic unpacking and 
revisiting of this material at regular in-person integration meet-
ings in the weeks following the session.
Additionally, the building of meaningfulness across sessions 
suggests interventions offering a single psilocybin session may be 
sub-optimal for achieving a lasting therapeutic effect. Previous 
research on ketamine-assisted therapy for heroin dependence 
found significantly greater long-term abstinence in individuals 
receiving three as opposed to one therapeutic ketamine adminis-
tration (Krupitsky et al., 2007). Given also that in this study, more 
mystical-type experiences were observed in participants’ second 
sessions than in their third (Garcia-Romeu et al., 2014), and that 
one-quarter of our sample did not feel at the time that they needed 
a third session to successfully quit smoking, two sessions using 
ascending doses may represent a good middle-ground for future 
clinical research in psychedelic-assisted addiction treatment.
Consistent with previous research in healthy volunteers 
(Griffiths et al., 2008; MacLean et al., 2011), participants reported 
a range of persisting positive effects beyond smoking cessation, 
including increased openness, altruism and pro-social behaviour. 
Like smoking cessation, these other perceived benefits were 
largely attributed to psilocybin experiences, sometimes in con-
cert with preparatory and integrative counselling. Aesthetic 
appreciation, fantasy-proneness and tolerance of different ideas 
and values, have been conceptualised as sub-dimensions of the 
personality trait of openness to experience (McCrae and Costa, 
1985). This supports earlier findings that personality openness 
increases after psilocybin-occasioned mystical experiences 
(MacLean et al., 2011), and such openness may conversely play 
an important role in effecting the major behavioural changes 
inherent to successful addiction treatment (Bogenschutz and 
Pommy, 2012).
Participant feedback on the protocol design offers a useful 
glimpse into potential improvements to the study from the per-
spective of participants. A quarter of participants found the 
expectations on them to fill out paperwork immediately after 
psilocybin sessions to be excessive, despite acknowledging its 
importance for research purposes. The impact of musical selec-
tion, setting, and ritualistic components in future research admin-
istering psychedelics will need to be examined more closely in 
order to optimise therapeutic procedures and environment.
Finally, psilocybin was perceived by participants as not at all 
addictive, consistent with research showing that psilocybin and 
other classic psychedelics serve as poor reinforcers in nonhu-
mans (Fantegrossi et al., 2004), and the consensus that classic 
psychedelics do not lead to compulsive drug seeking (O’Brien, 
2006). Participant responses in this study about the potential 
addictiveness of psilocybin are remarkably similar to qualitative 
comments made by participants in a study examining LSD in the 
treatment of heroin addiction (Savage and McCabe, 1973). 
Comparing LSD to heroin, participants in that study expressed 
‘… a uniform view that the LSD experience provided a confron-
tation with one’s problems rather than an escape from them.’ 
Given the dangers in providing an addictive drug as a therapeutic 
to addicted patients, the present qualitative data complement pre-
vious research in allaying such concerns regarding addiction 
treatment using classic psychedelics.
Study limitations
Three of the 15 participants declined invitation to be interviewed. 
Two of these individuals did not successfully stop smoking as part 
of the study, and the third relapsed between the 6- and 12-month 
follow-ups. These participants could have yielded useful data on 
why the study did not lead to successful smoking cessation in some 
cases. As a qualitative retrospective study of 12 participants that 
was based on an open-label pilot study, no definitive conclusions 
regarding efficacy can be drawn.
For example, the role of the supportive pair of guides was 
considered central by all participants, and yet cannot be con-
trolled for. However, by identifying themes in participant 
responses, we have highlighted relationships between various 
elements of the study protocol and participant experiences, in the 


Noorani et al.	
13
hope of contributing to the development of best practice in rela-
tion to psychedelic psychotherapy. Moreover, it is not evident 
how one may assess the relative contribution towards safety and 
efficacy of supportive guides without compromising key ethical 
considerations (see Johnson et al., 2008). 
Conclusion
This retrospective qualitative analysis of participant interviews 
from an open-label pilot study of psilocybin-facilitated smoking 
cessation revealed key themes in participant experiences and 
potential mechanisms of change, contributing to an understand-
ing of the therapeutic process as well as considerations for future 
research in the nascent field of clinical psychedelic psychother-
apy. Conducting psilocybin sessions within a structured thera-
peutic protocol led to psychological insights, experiences of 
interconnectedness, feelings of awe and curiosity, and reduced 
withdrawal symptoms, all reported by participants as central 
mechanisms of change leading to their successful smoking cessa-
tion. Preparatory counselling and rapport-building with session 
guides were also highlighted as important contributors to smok-
ing cessation.
In addition to smoking cessation, the psilocybin-facilitated 
smoking cessation intervention produced a range of auxiliary 
persisting positive effects, including increased aesthetic appreci-
ation, altruism and pro-social behaviour.
For psychedelic psychotherapy to be feasible at scale, stream-
lining treatment protocols without compromising efficacy will be 
crucial, and qualitative investigation can contribute considerably 
to this endeavour. In addition to randomised trials, future research 
into psilocybin-facilitated addiction treatment should examine 
the optimal number of psilocybin treatment sessions, the window 
of time between sessions, and the ways in which meaning is 
derived from session experiences independent of mystical-type 
effects. Further elucidation of the variety of psychedelic-facili-
tated experiences, and the role of different study factors, will be 
valuable in developing novel psychedelic-assisted addiction 
treatment interventions going forward.
Acknowledgements
Mary Cosimano, MSW; Margaret Klinedinst, BS; Patrick Johnson, 
PhD; Matthew Bradstreet, PhD; Rosemary Scavullo-Flickinger, BA; 
Fred Reinholdt, MA; Samantha Gebhart, BS; Grant Glatfelter, BS; 
Jefferson Mattingly, BA; and Toni White, BA assisted in data collec-
tion. Annie Umbricht, MD and Leticia Nanda, CRNP provided medical 
screening and coverage, William A Richards, STM, PhD provided valu-
able clinical consultation, and Nora Belblidia, MPS assisted with 
proofreading.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: 
Authors RRG and TCS are on the board of the Heffter Research Institute, 
which provided funding for the initial pilot study.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: The smoking ces-
sation study upon which this qualitative study is based was funded by 
Heffter Research Institute and the Beckley Foundation. Support for TN 
was provided by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) grant 
T32DA07292. Support for AG-R was provided by NIDA grant 
T32DA07209. Support for RRG was provided in part by NIDA grant 
R01DA003889.
Notes
1.	
Five of these participants had complete mystical experi-
ences, as assessed by quantitative measures (Garcia-Romeu 
et al., 2014). Participants 403, 405 and 422 did not.
2.	
Four of these participants had complete mystical experi-
ences, as assessed by quantitative measures (Garcia-Romeu 
et al., 2014). Participants 403 and 422 did not.
3.	
These reports were consistent with previously published 
quantitative measures of craving and withdrawal (Johnson 
et al., 2014), on which 424 scored highest among interview-
ees in the week after the first psilocybin session.
4.	
Quantitative assessments of craving and withdrawal in the 
week after the first psilocybin session showed that among 
interviewees who quit smoking, 416 and 427 scored highest.
5.	
These data are generally consistent with quantitative rat-
ings of personal meaning and spiritual significance, which 
showed an overall increase on average from session 1 to 3 
(Johnson et al., 2014).
ORCID iD
Tehseen Noorani 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4185-0218
References
Belser AB, Agin-Liebes G, Swift TC, et al. (2017) Patient experiences 
of psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy: An interpretative phenomeno-
logical analysis. J Humanist Psychol 57: 354–388.
Bogenschutz MP and Johnson MW (2016) Classic hallucinogens in the 
treatment of addictions. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychia-
try 64: 250–258.
Bogenschutz MP, Forcehimes AA, Pommy JA, et al. (2015) Psilocybin-
assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: A proof-of-concept study. 
J Psychopharmacol 29: 289–299.
Bogenschutz MP and Pommy JM (2012) Therapeutic mechanisms of 
classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions: From indirect 
evidence to testable hypotheses. Drug Test Anal 4: 543–555.
Cahill K, Stevens S and Lancaster T (2014) Pharmacological treatments 
for smoking cessation. JAMA 311: 193–194.
Campbell J, Cousineau P and Brown SL (1990) The Hero’s Journey: 
Joseph Campbell on His Life and Work. Vol. 7. Novato, CA: New 
World Library.
Carbonaro TM, Bradstreet MP, Barrett FS, et al. (2016) Survey study 
of challenging experiences after ingesting psilocybin mushrooms: 
Acute and enduring positive and negative consequences. J Psycho-
pharmacol 30: 1268–1278.
Cicchetti DV (1994) Guidelines, criteria, and rules of thumb for evaluat-
ing normed and standardized assessment instruments in psychology. 
Psychol Assess 6: 284–290.
Cohen J (1960) Kappa: Coefficient of concordance. Educ Psychol Meas 
20: 37–46.
Dedoose (2016) Version 7.0.23, Web Application for Managing,Analyzing, 
and Presenting Qualitative and Mixed Method Research Data. Los-
Angeles: Socio Cultural Research Consultants.Available at: www.
dedoose.com.
De Vries H, Elliott MN, Kanouse DE, et al. (2008) Using pooled kappa 
to summarize interrater agreement across many items. Field Methods 
20: 272–282.


14	
Journal of Psychopharmacology 00(0)
Doblin R (1991) Pahnke’s Good Friday experiment: A long-term fol-
lowup and methodological critique. J Trans Psychol 23: 1–28.
Doering-Silveira E, Grob CS, De Rios MD, et al. (2005) Report on psy-
choactive drug use among adolescents using Ayahuasca within a 
religious context. J Psychoactive Drugs 37: 141–144.
Fabregas JM, Gonzalez D, Fondevila S, et  al. (2010) Assessment of 
addiction severity among ritual users of Ayahuasca. Drug Alcohol 
Depend 111: 257–261.
Fagerström K (2012) Determinants of tobacco use and renaming the 
FTND to the Fagerström Test for Cigarette Dependence. Nicotine 
Tob Res 14: 75–78.
Fantegrossi WE, Woods JH and Winger G (2004) Transient reinforcing 
effects of phenylisopropylamine and indolealkylamine hallucino-
gens in rhesus monkeys. Behav Pharmacol 15: 149–157.
Fleiss JL (1971) Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. 
Psychol Bull 76: 378–382.
Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR and Johnson MW (2014) Psilocybin-
occasioned mystical experiences in the treatment of tobacco addic-
tion. Curr Drug Abuse Rev 7: 157–164.
Garcia-Romeu A, Kersgaard B and Addy PH (2016) Clinical applica-
tions of hallucinogens: A review. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 24: 
229–268.
Gasser P, Holstein D, Michel Y, et al. (2014) Safety and Efficacy of 
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide-Assisted Psychotherapy for Anxiety 
Associated With Life-Threatening Diseases. J Nerv Ment Dis 202: 
513–520.
Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Carducci MA, et al. (2016) Psilocybin pro-
duces substantial and sustained decreases in depression and anxiety 
in patients with life-threatening cancer: A randomized double-blind 
trial. J Psychopharmacol 30: 1181–1197.
Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Richards WA, et al. (2011) Psilocybin occa-
sioned mystical-type experiences: Immediate and persisting dose-
related effects. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 218: 649–665.
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, Johnson MW, et al. (2008) Mystical-type 
experiences occasioned by psilocybin mediate the attribution of per-
sonal meaning and spiritual significance 14 months later. J Psycho-
pharmacol 22: 621–632.
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, et  al. (2006) Psilocybin can 
occasion mystical-type experiences having substantial and sustained 
personal meaning and spiritual significance. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) 2006; 187(3): 268–283.
Halpern JH (1996) The use of hallucinogens in the treatment of addiction. 
Addict Res 4: 177–189.
Halpern JH, Sherwood AR, Passie T, et al. (2008) Evidence of health and 
safety in American members of a religion who use a hallucinogenic 
sacrament. Med Sci Monit 14: SR15– SR22.
Hari J (2015) Chasing the Scream: The Opposite of Addiction is Connec-
tion. New York: Bloomsbury.
Hays JT, Ebbert JO and Sood A (2008) Efficacy and safety of varenicline 
for smoking cessation. Am J Med 121: S32–S42.
Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, et al. (1991) The Fagerström 
Test for Nicotine Dependence: A revision of the Fagerström Toler-
ance Questionnaire. Br J Addict 86: 1119–1127.
Hendricks PS, Clark CB, Johnson MW, et al. (2014) Hallucinogen use 
predicts reduced recidivism among substance-involved offenders 
under community corrections supervision. J Psychopharmacol 28: 
62–66.
Hendricks PS, Thorne CB, Clark CB, et al. (2015) Classic psychedelic 
use is associated with reduced psychological distress and suicidal-
ity in the United States adult population. J Psychopharmacol 29: 
280–288.
Johnson MW, Richards WA and Griffiths RR (2008) Human halluci-
nogen research: Guidelines for Safety. J Psychopharmacol 22: 
603–620.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, et al. (2014) Pilot study 
of the 5-HT2AR agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco 
addiction. J Psychopharmacol 28: 983–992.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A and Griffiths RR (2016) Long-term 
follow-up of psilocybin-facilitated smoking cessation. Am J Drug 
Alcohol Abuse 43: 55–60.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Johnson PS, et al. (2017) An online sur-
vey of tobacco smoking cessation associated with naturalistic psy-
chedelic use. J Psychopharmacol 31: 841–850.
Kabat-Zinn J (1990) Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of your 
Body and Mind to Face Stress, Pain, and Illness. New York: Dela-
corte.
Krebs TS and Johansen PØ (2012) Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for 
alcoholism: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Psycho-
pharmacol 26: 994–1002.
Krupitsky EM, Burakov AM, Dunaevsky IV, et al. (2007) Single ver-
sus repeated sessions of ketamine-assisted psychotherapy for people 
with heroin dependence. J Psychoactive Drugs 39: 13–19.
MacLean KA, Johnson MW and Griffiths RR (2011) Mystical experi-
ences occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocybin lead to increases 
in the personality domain of openness. J Psychopharmacol 25: 
1453–1461.
Marks DF and Sykes CM (2002) Randomised controlled trial of cognitive 
behavioural therapy for smokers living in a deprived area of London: 
Outcome at one-year follow-up. Psychol Health Med 7: 17–24.
McCrae RR and Costa PT Jr (1985) Openness to experience. In: Hogan 
R and Jones WH (eds) Perspectives in Personality. Greenwich, Con-
necticut: JAI Press, pp. 145–172.
Mottillo S, Filion KB, Bélisle P, et al. (2009) Behavioural interventions 
for smoking cessation: A meta-analysis of randomised controlled tri-
als. Eur Heart J 30: 718–730.
O’Brien CP (2006) Drug addiction and drug abuse. In: Brunton LL, Lazo 
JS and Parker KL (eds) Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacologi-
cal Basis of Therapeutics. 11th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 
607–627.
Osmond H (1957) A review of the clinical effects of psychotomimetic 
agents. Ann N Y Acad Sci 66: 418–434.
Pahnke WN (1969) Psychedelic drugs and mystical experience. Int Psy-
chiatry Clin 5: 149–162.
Pahnke WN and Richards WA (1996) Implications of LSD and experi-
mental mysticism. J Relig Health 5: 175–208.
Ross S (2012) Serotonergic hallucinogens and emerging targets 
for addiction pharmacotherapies. Psychiatr Clin North Am 35: 
357–374.
Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, et al. (2016) Rapid and sustained symptom 
reduction following psilocybin treatment for anxiety and depression 
in patients with life-threatening cancer: A randomized controlled 
trial. J Psychopharmacol 30: 1165–1180.
Savage C and McCabe OL (1973) Residential psychedelic (LSD) therapy 
for the narcotic addict: A controlled study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
1973; 28: 808–814.
Stace WT (1960) Mysticism and Philosophy. Philadelphia, PA: Lippin-
cott.
Sedgwick E (2003) Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity. 
Berkeley, CA: Duke University Press.
Sessa B and Johnson MW (2015) Can psychedelic compounds play a part 
in drug dependence therapy? Br J Psychiatry 206: 1–3.
Swift TC, Belser AB, Agin-Liebes, G, et al. (2017) Cancer at the Din-
ner Table: Experiences of Psilocybin-Assisted Psychotherapy for 
the Treatment of Cancer-Related Distress. J Humanist Psychol 57: 
488–519.
Sykes CM and Marks DF (2001) Effectiveness of a cognitive behaviour 
therapy self-help programme for smokers in London, UK. Health 
Promot Int 16: 255–260.
Tønnesen P, Tonstad S, Hjalmarson A, et al. (2003) A multicentre, ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 1-year study of bupro-
pion SR for smoking cessation. J Intern Med 254: 184–192. 
Watts R, Day C, Krzanowski J, et al. (2017) Patients’ Accounts of 
Increased “Connectedness” and “Acceptance” After Psilocybin for 
Treatment-resistant Depression. J Humanist Psychol 57: 520–564.
View publication stats
