https://doi.org/10.1177/0022167817711304
Journal of Humanistic Psychology
﻿1­–38
© The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav 
DOI: 10.1177/0022167817711304
journals.sagepub.com/home/jhp
Psychedelic Research
Developing Guidelines 
and Competencies 
for the Training of 
Psychedelic Therapists
Janis Phelps1
Abstract
Research since the 1950s has shown that psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy 
has had significant positive effects in reductions of specific clinical symptoms 
and increases in quality of life as measured on a variety of indices. The intensity 
of focus on evidence-based outcomes, however, has resulted in a paucity of 
active discussions and research on the core competencies of the therapists 
themselves. The context of the history of psychedelic research reveals how 
this neglect of therapist variables occurred. With current discussions of Phase 
3 and expanded access research programs for psilocybin-assisted and MDMA-
assisted psychotherapies, there will be a great need for competent therapists 
trained in this clinical specialty. This is particularly the case if less restricted, 
legal medical use is approved within the next 6 to 10 years. This article is 
the first review and compilation of psychedelic therapist competencies 
derived from the psychedelic literature. These six therapist competencies 
are empathetic abiding presence; trust enhancement; spiritual intelligence; 
knowledge of the physical and psychological effects of psychedelics; therapist 
self-awareness and ethical integrity; and proficiency in complementary 
techniques. A further contribution of this review is a delineation of the 12 
fundamental curricular domains of study for the training and development of 
these therapist competencies. As current legal restrictions evolve, aspects of 
these training guidelines will develop accordingly.
1California Institute of Integral Studies, San Francisco, CA, USA
Corresponding Author:
Janis Phelps, California Institute of Integral Studies, 1453 Mission Street, San Francisco,  
CA 94103, USA. 
Email: jphelps@ciis.edu
711304 JHPXXX10.1177/0022167817711304Journal of Humanistic PsychologyPhelps
research-article2017


2	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
Keywords
psychedelic, therapist, competencies, psychedelic-assisted, training, guide, 
therapy, ethics, presence, set and setting, empathy
Setting the Stage for Psychedelic Research
The evolution of psychedelic psychotherapy in the 20th and into the 21st 
century has been both furthered and stymied by the cultural backdrop 
against which these substances were being explored at the time. When 
research into psychedelics, known collectively as hallucinogens, was 
underway in the early 1950s in clinical and laboratory settings, they were 
viewed as tools that could be used to better understand how the brain itself 
works (Abramson, 1960; Grob, Greer, & Mangini, 1998). From 1950 to 
the mid-1960s, there were more than 1,000 clinical papers published about 
the sessions of some 40,000 patients, scores of books and six international 
conferences on psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy (Grinspoon & Bakalar, 
1979). A core question underlying psychedelic-assisted therapy surfaced 
in those early years, well stated here by conference panelist, Robert 
Murphy:
Is LSD [lysergic acid diethylamide] a therapy in itself, with the therapeutic 
relationship functioning merely for support? I believe this is so. Or is the 
essential therapeutic process the sort of thing Dr. Abramson described, in 
which the therapeutic relationship is the essence of the therapy, and LSD 
simply facilitates or catalyzes it? These questions underlie a good deal of the 
discussion here, and are perhaps of more importance than we have recognized. 
(Lennard & Hewitt, 1960, p. 219)
There are references in the research literature to the hypothesized effects of 
therapist competencies and therapeutic alliance-building on clinical out-
comes, but these variables have gone relatively unsystematized and unre-
searched due to changes in the political climate in the United States. Any 
discussion of therapist skill bases and the training of therapists for this 
research requires a historical contextualization within the ebb and flow of the 
60-year-old psychedelic research field itself.
In the clinical setting, these substances were initially of interest based on 
a belief that they could induce elements of psychosis (an effect often termed 
psychotomimetic) and could reveal underlying psychodynamic processes 
(Eisner & Cohen, 1958; Grob, Bossis, & Griffiths, 2013). However, soon 
interest shifted to their potential as catalysts for therapeutic healing in the 


Phelps	
3
clinical setting, particularly with the classic psychedelics, mescaline, and 
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide). In a therapeutic model known as psy-
cholytic therapy, low- and mid-dose applications were administered over an 
extended period of time in conjunction with psychoanalytic psychotherapy 
(Grof, 1968; Naranjo, 2013; Passie, 2012). Alternatively, high-dose applica-
tions were used and limited to a handful of significantly longer sessions 
followed by psychotherapeutic integration work (Gasser et  al., 2014; 
Osmond, 1957).
During this cornucopia of research, some clinicians posed optimal qualities 
for therapists. Early researchers suggested that therapists should have a mix of 
empathy and “objectivity,” which they variously defined as “being as normal 
as possible” and “balanced” (Lennard & Hewitt, 1960). Others remarked that 
therapists needed to be calm and composed (Blewett & Chwelos, 1959), aware 
of the effects of their reactions on the research participant (Buckman, 1967), 
and keenly capable of transference analysis (Hoffer & Osmond, 1967). While 
direct research on therapist variables was proposed during this period, there 
exist only clinical case studies and self-reported, anecdotal, and sparse discus-
sion of qualities, skills, and competencies for therapists.
Researchers in the 1950s and 1960s who pursued psychedelic-assisted 
therapy quickly discovered psychedelics’ mysticomimetic potential—their 
ability to catalyze transformative, breakthrough experiences (Abramson, 
1960; Eisner & Cohen, 1958; Riedlinger & Riedlinger, 1994). The promise of 
psychedelic-assisted therapy was considered so great that psychiatrists and 
psychologists began convening conferences where researchers could share 
their findings and discuss the potential implications of them. For example, 
international conferences on the use of LSD in psychotherapy were held in 
Princeton, NJ, London, and Long Island, NY, in 1959, 1961, and 1965, 
respectively (Pahnke & Richards, 1966). In April of 1969, the American 
Association for Humanistic Psychology and the Menninger Foundation 
cosponsored an invitation-only conference in Council Grove, Kansas, dedi-
cated to the topic of altered states of consciousness, which counted among its 
participants “national and international therapists working with psychedel-
ics” (Fadiman, 1969, p. 135).
The Dark Ages and the Renaissance in Psychedelic 
Research
They would not be able to publicly voice their enthusiasm for psychedelic-
assisted therapy much longer, however. In the face of widespread use deemed 
unmanageable by the federal government, President Nixon in 1970 signed 
into law the Controlled Substances Act, which made any use of the specified 


4	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
psychedelic substances illegal. Then the entactogen MDMA (3,4-methylene-
dioxymethamphetamine) was introduced to the therapeutic world by several 
therapists, most notably by Leo Zeff, in the mid-1970s (Stolaroff, 1997). 
Entactogen, it should be noted, is a term coined by chemist David Nichols 
referring to those psychedelic medicines found in the MDA (3,4-methylene-
dioxyamphetamine) and MDMA family (Shulgin & Nichols, 1978; Nichols, 
1986). MDMA was viewed as a “penicillin for the soul” by therapist guides 
for enhancing empathy, creativity, and team building (Shulgin, 2001), but 
along with its researched pharmaceutical analogues stayed largely under the 
radar of the mainstream culture until they, too, were placed on Schedule I 
status in 1985 (Dass, Metzner, & Bravo, 2010; Degenhardt & Hall, 2010; 
Nutt, King & Nichols, 2013).
In 1986, Rick Doblin founded the Multidisciplinary Association of 
Psychedelic Studies (Emerson, Ponté, Jerome, & Doblin, 2014). In 1993, the 
Heffter Research Institute was cofounded by David Nichols, George Greer, 
Dennis McKenna, Mark Geyer, and Charles Grob (Nichols, 2014). In the 
meantime, in the fall of 1990, the federal hold on psychedelic-assisted 
research had loosened enough to allow Rick Strassman to conduct clinical 
trials with the psychedelic DMT (N,N-dimethyltryptamine) (Strassman, 
2010; Strassman & Qualls, 1994; Strassman, Qualls, Uhlenhuth, & Kellner, 
1994). In one of the few other reports in this time period, Liester, Grob, 
Bravo, and Walsh (1992) published positive data gathered from the subjec-
tive experiences of 20 psychiatrists who took MDMA as part of their study. 
In these years of the early 1990s, both the National Institute on Drug Abuse 
and a Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Advisory Committee recom-
mended that clinical research on psychedelics could be resumed, “subject to 
the same regulations that the FDA used to review research with all other 
drugs” (Nichols, 2014, p. 22).
But in the wake of both Strassman’s research approval coup and the piv-
oting of the two federal agencies, it took the collective efforts of MAPS and 
Heffter and the largesse of their respective donors to get psychedelic research 
programs started up again in earnest. This time around, researchers were 
learning from the mistakes of the past, pursuing work with those substances 
that had both the greatest chance of clinical efficacy and, from a cultural 
standpoint, the fewest negative associations (Tupper, Wood, Yensen, & 
Johnson, 2015). For MAPS, that meant a focus on MDMA for the treatment 
of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; Emerson et  al., 2014) and for 
Heffter, psilocybin for the treatment of anxiety in patients with advanced-
stage cancer (Grob et  al., 2011). These organizations continue to work 
closely with researchers at University of California, Los Angeles; New York 
University (NYU); Johns Hopkins; University of New Mexico; University 


Phelps	
5
of Wisconsin; and other centers in order to conduct clinical research on psy-
chedelic-assisted therapies. The research agendas have specifically followed 
the FDA protocols for drug development in three phases: In Phase 1, evi-
dence for safety of the medicine is gathered; in Phase 2, findings are sought 
that show the medicine is efficacious for medical condition(s); and in Phase 
3, researchers attempt to show that the drug is as effective or more effective 
than currently available medicines in existing treatments. The empirical 
findings from the FDA-approved clinical trials in the past 20 years have 
been so positive that there are current applications to the FDA for permis-
sion to step into Phase 3 clinical trials for MDMA for treatment-resistant 
PTSD and psilocybin for end-of-life distress and major depressive disorder 
(Doblin, 2015; Nichols, 2014).
Present-Day Research With Psychedelics
The momentum of the current renaissance period has occurred through the 
dedication, persistence, and wisdom of several dozens of researcher clini-
cians, many of who have sacrificed some portion of their careers for this work. 
MAPS and Heffter are not the only not-for-profit organizations partnering 
with academic institutions to conduct and underwrite clinical research of psy-
chedelic-assisted therapy. The three organizations of note in this regard are the 
Council on Spiritual Practices (CSP), convened in 1994 under the impetus of 
Robert Jesse; the Beckley Foundation, founded in 1998 by Amanda Feilding; 
and the Usona Institute, started by William Linton in 2014. All of them help 
financially support clinical studies evaluating the role of psychedelics in a 
therapeutic environment (Feilding, 1998; Jesse, 1994; Linton, 2014). Indeed, 
without the tireless efforts of all these organizations (particularly by CSP in 
the early 1990s), it is unlikely that research in this field would be remotely as 
far along as it is now. And with their help, the cultural tides have turned to 
greater interest in this field, as evidenced by the publication in the past 5 years 
of the publicly acclaimed New Yorker article, The Trip Treatment, by Pollan 
(2015) and the publication of such books as Healing with Entactogens by 
Passie (2012), Manifesting Minds by Doblin and Burge (2014), Sacred 
Knowledge: Psychedelics and Religious Experiences by Richards (2015), the 
second edition of Zig Zag Zen: Buddhism and Psychedelics (Badiner, 2015), 
Allies for Awakening: Guidelines for Productive and Safe Experiences with 
Entheogens by Metzner (2015), and Altered States: Buddhism and Psychedelic 
Spirituality in America by Osto (2016).
To contextualize the reasons for a lack of direct research on therapist quali-
ties and competencies, a focus will be made on the highlights of recent research 
data on the medicines poised to move into Phase 3 drug trials: psilocybin and 


6	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
MDMA. The influence of therapist variables that we commonly see in therapy 
outcome studies has not been the focus of this era of research, however, 
because the work within the structure of FDA-approved clinical trials neces-
sitates controlling for differential therapist effects. This contemporary research 
has sought to delineate the role of the therapist as a deliverer of a safe and 
consistent set and setting within consistent protocols across conditions.
Current Psilocybin-Assisted Therapy Outcomes
Beginning in 2006, researchers at Johns Hopkins University began publishing 
results from the first of a series of clinical studies looking at the potential of 
psilocybin-assisted therapy to induce mystical-type experiences. In the first 
study, psilocybin-assisted therapy was found to occasion such experiences and 
2 months later, the study participants rated the experience “as having substan-
tial personal meaning and spiritual significance and attributed to the experi-
ence sustained positive changes in attitudes and behavior” (Griffiths, Richards, 
McCann, & Jesse, 2006, p. 268). In follow-up interviews conducted 14 months 
later, 94% of the volunteers rated at least one session in the top five spiritually 
significant experiences and in the top five personally meaningful experiences 
of their lives (Jesse & Griffiths, 2014).
In a psilocybin-assisted therapy pilot study on smoking cessation, Johnson, 
Garcia-Romeu, Cosimano, and Griffiths (2014) reported remarkable findings at 
6 months’ follow-up: 12 of the 15 participants were abstinent from tobacco 
(based on physiological indices). These outcomes were significantly correlated 
with reports of mystical experience, experience of increased meaning, and spiri-
tual significance. Johnson, Garcia-Romeu, and Griffiths (2017) and team found 
that at 12-month follow-up, 67% of these participants remained smoking absti-
nent. This is a remarkable finding in the field of tobacco addiction. Bogenschutz 
(2015) is currently conducting an NYU double-blind study on the effects of 
psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy on alcohol dependence. Members of the 
Hopkins research group are also conducting a study on the effects of psilocybin 
on the psychology of long-term meditators and brain function, as measured by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (Griffiths, 2015b). And NYU and Johns 
Hopkins are in the midst of a study focused on the effects of psilocybin on reli-
gious leaders’ experience of mystical-like states (Griffiths, 2015a).
In a pilot study of patients with anxiety as a result of advanced-stage can-
cer, a team of researchers at University of California, Los Angeles–Harbor 
Medical Center led by Charles Grob found no adverse physical or psycho-
logical effects (Grob et al., 2011). But despite the relatively low dose of psi-
locybin administered to the patients, the study yielded a statistically 
significant reduction in anxiety. They note as well that the quality of the 


Phelps	
7
experience of psilocybin supports the development of strong therapeutic 
bonds and the lessening of demoralization. Griffiths et al. (2016) reported 
results on a very low dose psilocybin session versus a high-dose psilocybin 
session for 51 participants with life-threatening cancer. With 5 weeks between 
sessions and 6-month follow-up, the high-dose condition resulted in decreases 
in anxiety, death anxiety, and depressed mood with concomitant increases in 
life-meaning, optimism, quality of life. Clinically significant changes 
remained for 80% of participants at 6-month follow-up, with more than 80% 
endorsing the effects of the high-dose session to be moderately or greater 
increased life satisfaction/well-being.
In a related study Ross et al. (2016) measured the effects of psilocybin-
assisted therapy for 29 patients with cancer-related psychological distress on 
pain perception, depression, anxiety, existential/psychospiritual distress, 
quality of life, and spiritual/mystical states of consciousness. The research 
team found that single moderate-dose psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy pro-
duced rapid, robust and enduring anti-depressant and anxiolytic effects. 
Psilocybin-induced mystical experience mediated the therapeutic effect of 
psilocybin on their depression and anxiety.
Current MDMA-Assisted Therapy Outcomes
In 2011, Mithoefer, Wagner, Mithoefer, Jerome, and Doblin published the 
results of a Phase 2 clinical trial examining the effectiveness of MDMA on 
treatment-resistant PTSD. They found that 83% of those who received 
MDMA in conjunction with psychotherapy no longer qualified for a PTSD 
diagnosis two months post-treatment compared to 25% of other participants 
who only received a placebo (Mithoefer et al., 2011). All of the study partici-
pants who received MDMA-assisted therapy were found to have maintained 
both statistically and clinically significant symptom relief in a comprehen-
sive follow-up study (Mithoefer et al., 2013). Michael Mithoefer (2014) and 
Annie Mithoefer are now conducting an MDMA study with veterans, fire-
fighters, and police officers with treatment-resistant PTSD and are oversee-
ing studies on MDMA in Boulder, Colorado, Vancouver, B.C. and Beer 
Yaakov, Israel. Also of note is the on-going study looking at MDMA-assisted 
therapy for the treatment of social anxiety in autistic adults. (Danforth, 
Struble, Yazar-Klosinski, & Grob, 2015). Recent research has shown MDMA 
use to be correlated to self-compassion (Kamjol et  al., 2015), generosity 
toward close friends (Kirkpatrick, Delton, Robertson, & de Wit, 2015), and 
increases in emotional content in speech about a significant other during a 
talking task (Baggott, Kirkpatrick, Bedi, & de Wit, 2015).


8	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
Subjective Experiences of Participants in Psilocybin and MDMA 
Clinical Trials
The following discussion focuses on the primary clinical results regarding 
relationship and quality-of-life improvements for the research participants 
and reflects on some interesting parallels between participant outcomes and 
desired therapist characteristics. These highlighted clinical results are: 
occasioned mystical states and experiences; openness; improved quality of 
life; and enhanced experiences of love, empathy and meaning-making. 
Among the clinical outcomes briefly mentioned in the previous section are 
mystical states of consciousness or what is often referred to as the mystical 
experience. Pahnke and Richards (1966) divided the features of the psyche-
delic-induced mystical experience into nine categories, which Richards 
(2009) subsequently narrowed to six variables: unity; transcendence of 
time and space; intuitive knowledge; sacredness or awesomeness; deeply-
felt positive mood; and ineffability and paradoxicality. Not only have 
researchers found that these mystical experiences occasioned by psyche-
delic- and entactogen-assisted therapy can count among the most spiritually 
and personally significant of patients’ lives (Jesse & Griffiths, 2014), they 
have observed that such experiences produce increases in openness. 
“Importantly, participants who had a complete mystical experience during 
their high-dose session, but not others, showed enduring increases in open-
ness, suggesting that other mystical experiences could occasion similar 
change” (MacLean, Johnson, & Griffiths, 2011, p. 1456).
As such, a psychedelic- or entactogen-derived mystical experience can 
actually improve the quality of life to a notable degree for an addict, a trau-
matized person, or someone who is dying. As Bossis (2014), an investigator 
for NYU’s end-of-life psilocybin clinical trials, writes,
Enhanced spirituality and existential well-being derived from a mystical 
experience offers distinct opportunities for cancer patients to foster a sense of 
connectedness with the sacred, to enhance loving relationships with family and 
other significant persons in their life, and to live fully, in the moment, with 
equanimity and acceptance. (p. 266)
A pilot study looking at psilocybin for the treatment of tobacco addiction 
found a significant correlation between mystical experience measures and 
smoking cessation outcomes (Bogenschutz & Johnson, 2016; Johnson et al., 
2014). Indeed, the mystical experience that LSD catalyzed was recognized 
by none other than Bill Wilson, founder of Alcoholics Anonymous, as having 
a potentially profound impact on addiction (Richards, 2009).


Phelps	
9
Also of interest is the finding that the experience of love can be facilitated 
by both MDMA and psilocybin. With the lessening of fear and anxiety, feel-
ings of love can come to the surface, allowing patients to examine their lives 
from a more secure place, which is one of the core reasons that MDMA is so 
effective in facilitating therapy (Greer & Tolbert, 1990; Mithoefer et  al., 
2011). For patients with terminal illnesses, the experience of love can be 
especially transformative (Grob et al., 2013; Roberts & Hruby, 2002). Bossis 
(2014), in recalling clinical studies using psilocybin with advanced-stage 
cancer, noted that patients reported experiences akin to what would be con-
sidered agape, or universal love.
Another important clinical outcome facilitated by psychedelic- or entacto-
gen-assisted psychotherapy is the experience of greater empathy (Riedlinger 
& Riedlinger, 1994). In clinical trials focused on psilocybin and mystical 
experiences, Griffiths et al. (2011) found that a significant increase in empa-
thy during the study remained stable for a majority of the participants at the 
follow-up assessments 14 months later. In a recent analysis of MDMA 
research on empathy, Jerome, Schuster, and Klosinski (2013) propose that the 
empathy engendered by MDMA could also play a role in the treatment of 
addictions, as it could allow patients to acknowledge to a greater degree their 
substance abuse, the effect it has on others, and the corresponding need to 
change their behavior.
Finally, there are predominant and positive outcomes regarding the 
increased capacity to make meaning of one’s experience after psilocybin-
assisted therapy (Griffiths et al., 2011; Grob et al., 2013; Jesse & Griffiths, 
2014; Richards, 2014). The ability to make new meaning from old experi-
ences can catalyze the healing process (Echenhofer, 2011). Rev. Mike Young, 
one of the divinity students who participated in Pahnke’s Good Friday 
Experiment in 1962, expressed this sentiment 30 years later:
The drug experience can evoke a reordering, a reframing, of the experiencer’s 
meaning and meaning-making. . . . This reframing and re-connecting, this 
re-membering of ourselves, is what pushes and pulls us to be more than we are. 
(Young, 1995, p. 38)
The Competencies of the Therapist Guide for 
Psychedelic-Assisted Psychotherapy
The benefits of psychedelic-assisted therapy have become clear with each 
successive study, and with them, the best practices needed to elicit positive 
therapeutic outcomes. But discussions about the desired qualities and compe-
tencies of the therapists themselves have remained limited. Clinicians have 


10	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
typically pointed out therapist competencies when sharing case study obser-
vations, while research-based descriptions of therapist competencies have 
primarily taken place within the parameters of treatment manuals and proto-
cols. The MAPS manual for MDMA-assisted PTSD therapy stands as an 
exemplar (Mithoefer, 2016). If Phase 3 studies get the go-ahead soon from 
the FDA and if those clinical trials are deemed by the FDA to be successful 
in comparison with results of current treatments for the medical conditions 
studied, there will be decidedly broader scopes of practice for therapists in 
psychedelic-assisted therapy and research. The time has come to have serious 
conversations and inquiry dedicated to psychedelic therapist competencies 
and training in anticipation of these developments. The psychedelic therapist 
guide competencies that follow are described using the usual terminology of 
mental health and medical professionals’ competencies in three functional 
areas: knowledge and understandings; values, attitudes and dispositions; and 
skills.
There are references in contemporary discourse to three terms used to 
describe a mental health or medical professional who is present and facilitat-
ing a psychedelic therapy session: a sitter (Greer & Tolbert, 1998; Grof, 
1980; Taylor, 2007); a guide (Cooper, 2014; Jesse, 1995; Pahnke & Richards, 
1966); and a therapist (Abramson, 1956; Eisner & Cohen, 1958; Noller, 
2009; Walsh & Grob, 2005). A review of the psychedelic literature shows that 
the preferred term by psychedelic scholars is “therapist” and the role is asso-
ciated with that of being a “guide,” with these two terms sometimes used 
interchangeably. A cogent description of the therapists who act as guides in 
psychedelic research is from Mithoefer (2016):
The therapists act as empathic listeners, trustworthy guides, facilitators of deep 
emotional expression and catharsis, and supporters of the participant’s own 
inner healing intelligence. . . . The therapists’ role is often to follow, rather than 
guide, the participant, as she/he explores new and unexpected perceptions and 
realizations. At other times it may be helpful for the therapists to remind the 
participant that facing painful experiences is actually a path toward healing.  
. . . In this situation, it is valuable for the therapists to intervene and guide the 
participant back to her/his internal experience. In this case, guidance should be 
offered as a possible choice without implying that it is expected or is the only 
correct course to follow. (pp. 29, 30, 38)
This witnessing and acknowledgment by the therapist facilitates in the par-
ticipant a sense of trust, safety, encouragement, and fortitude, as is true in the 
various models of psychotherapy. At the same time, it solidifies the therapeu-
tic relationship through the ebb and flow of challenges and releases during 
psychedelic preparation, sessions, and integration periods. The therapist 


Phelps	
11
helps the participant move through three phases of treatment: preparation for 
the medicine-assisted session, the medicine session itself, and integration of 
the psychological material that arises during preparation and the medicine 
session. The context within which this therapeutic process occurs is referred 
to as set and setting (Grof, 1980):
The term set includes the expectation, motivations, and intentions of the subject 
in regard to the session; the therapist’s or guide’s concept of the nature of the 
LSD experience; the agreed upon goal of the psychedelic procedure; the 
preparation and programming of the session; and the specific technique of 
guidance used during the drug experience. The term setting refers to the actual 
environment, both physical and interpersonal, and to the concrete circumstances 
under which the drug is administered. (p. 102)
In intersubjectivity terms, these therapeutic alliances within the set and set-
ting can be likened to a therapeutic fourth. The therapeutic fourth is the inter-
subjective field of set and setting that is cocreated by the influence of the 
therapists, the psychedelic medicine, and the person ingesting the medicine.
This review and compilation of the extant, but sparse, literature on spe-
cific competencies of the psychedelic therapist guide reveals fundamental 
agreement on the core knowledge, attitudes, and skills of a therapist in this 
specialization. Most clinical scholars in the field have at least touched on the 
question of therapist competencies if only in an oblique manner. Most often 
we hear in the literature that such description is beyond the scope of the paper 
or book. Where it is published, both the psycholytic and client-centered 
researchers and thinkers suggest the following primary therapist qualities: an 
empathetic abiding presence; trust enhancement; spiritual intelligence; 
knowledge of the physical and psychological effects of psychedelics; thera-
pist self-awareness and ethical integrity; and proficiency in complementary 
techniques. Many of these desired competencies are characteristic of all psy-
chiatric and psychological treatment. However, there is a specificity to the 
competencies that is unique to the field of psychedelic-assisted psychother-
apy and requires specialized training. Each of the six competencies serve as 
umbrella terms under which reside several unique components that are 
closely related to one another.
Competency 1: Empathetic Abiding Presence
One of the hallmarks of humanistic therapies, the therapeutic capacity for 
empathy (Bugenthal, 1978; Maslow, 1970; Rogers, 1961), is a universally 
agreed-upon quality of a properly trained psychedelic therapist. This is not 
surprising, given that empathetic skills are foundational to the training of 


12	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
practitioners within the mental health, medical, and religious professions. In 
addition to the traditional understanding of empathy as key in facilitating 
positive therapeutic outcomes, empathy in the therapist guide takes a particu-
lar bent in psychedelic-assisted therapy (Grof, 2005; Mithoefer et al., 2011). 
Current thinking in this field embraces a particularity in the qualities of 
desired empathy from the therapist: an empathetic responsivity that has been 
leavened into a cultivated embodiment of a calm, abiding presence during 
psychedelic therapy. This empathetic abiding presence is a capacity evi-
denced in the therapist during preparation, the session itself, and integration 
meetings. The term “abiding” here is purposely used to convey aspects of a 
witnessing of the mystery of life in action during psychedelic-assisted psy-
chotherapy. Richards (2015) likens this to the ability to be present with quali-
ties of patience, openness and trust in the processes of unfolding. Mithoefer 
(2016) and colleagues determined that empathetic presence was one of seven 
unique therapist skills for adherence raters to assess when reviewing archival 
videos of sessions, which include: verbal communication; establishing rap-
port; communicating safety and support; eliciting pertinent information; 
addressing questions and concerns; empathetic presence; and non-directive 
approach.
Components of empathetic abiding presence range from composure, 
evenly suspended attention, mindfulness, empathetic listening, “doing by 
non-doing”, responding to distress with calmness, and equanimity. Buckman 
(1967) reports that the quality of empathy with presence and demeanor is 
crucial in this work because “the patient is very susceptible to mood and 
voice tone of therapist, nurse and other people in the treatment unit” (p. 89). 
Strassman (2010), Johnson, Richards, and Griffiths (2008) and Grof (1980) 
have shared similar clinical observations. “We have repeatedly observed that 
LSD subjects were able to tune into the inner feelings of the sitters with great 
accuracy” (Grof, 1980, p. 89). Taylor (2007) speaks of this presence as a 
capacity for a “widening the focus of awareness” and “doing by non-doing” 
during processes of Holotropic Breathwork, the widely known form of non-
psychedelic means of inducing a non-ordinary state of consciousness (p. 21). 
Stan and Christina Grof (2010) developed Holotropic Breathwork as a 
method of inquiry and transformation based on elements of yogic breathing 
practices. Naranjo (2006), a contemporary advocate of psycholytic psyche-
delic therapy, conceives of the complementarity between love and non-
attachment when the therapist practices mindfulness in sessions. Several 
researchers have commented that ways of listening, with empathy and pres-
ence, are much more impactful than engaging the participant in dialogues and 
inquiry (Naranjo, 2013; Stolaroff, 1997; Richards, 2009). “Dialogue between 
client and therapist, which most therapies view as central, appeared less 


Phelps	
13
important. Indeed, in high-dose sessions, it sometimes seemed more distract-
ing than beneficial” (Walsh & Grob, 2006, p. 440).
An aspect of empathy is likened to being balanced and aware of the mul-
tiplicity of what unfolds moment to moment for the volunteer (Richards, 
2003; Sherwood, Stolaroff, & Harmon, 1962). This specific quality of empa-
thy can be seen as akin to the stalwart analytic practice of evenly suspended 
attention (Epstein, 1984). Strassman (2002) reports that “our research nurse 
and I did our best to practice meditation while with our volunteers: watching 
the breath, being alert, eyes open, ready to respond, keeping a bright attitude, 
and getting out of the way of the volunteer’s experience” (p. 117). Of note 
here is the empathetic skill of being attentive, supportive, and becoming 
ground to the figure of the participant’s own process. In the MAPS manual 
for treatment of PTSD, Mithoefer (2016) states that
therapists should have a client centered orientation and should have done 
sufficient inner work themselves so they are comfortable following and 
supporting whatever course the participant’s own emotional process takes, rather 
than trying to impose upon it a predetermined course or outcome. (p. 11)
Thus, therapists practice to “learn when [their] prior training can be helpful 
and when it needs to be set aside and just be a good listener, compassionate 
observer and caring supporter” (Fadiman, 2011, p. 77).
Another component of empathetic abiding presence is the therapist’s 
equanimity and natural comfort in listening deeply and moving gracefully 
with the ebb and flow of each unique psychedelic session. This abiding ease 
is crucial when challenging and difficult moments arise for the participant 
during the session. This equanimity can be seen as consistent with Taylor’s 
(2007) statement that a guide develops the skills for “a balance of protection, 
permission and connection” (p. 133). The therapist guide’s knowledge of the 
interaction of the effects of the medicine, the setting, and the trust in the wis-
dom of the healing process is paramount for ease during sessions and for 
potentiating a corrective emotional experience for the participant (Bache, 
2000; Richards, Grof, Goodman, & Kurland, 1972). Grof (1980) adds that a 
therapist’s confidence and competence can be increased through observation 
of the participant’s patterns of movement into, through, and beyond over-
whelming difficult affect: “Witnessing positive resolutions of such states and 
seeing the same subjects only a few hours later radiant and joking, the thera-
pist gradually develops equanimity, confidence and tolerance in regard to the 
entire spectrum of psychedelic phenomena” (p. 101).
In addition to these above qualities, therapists are seen as best suited to 
this work if they themselves have experienced a fair share of transformative, 


14	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
nonordinary, or alternate states of consciousness (the latter term coined by 
Richards, 2003). This criterion has clear face validity, given the clinical set 
and setting within which they provide therapy (Blewett & Chwelos, 1959; 
Fischer, 2015; Grob, 2002a, 2002b). While not a consensus, there is a vein in 
the limited discourse on therapist skills and training that suggests the need for 
psychedelic therapists to be versed in a meditation or contemplative practice 
(Pahnke, 1963; Richards, 2005; Strassman, 2010). Possibly they have expe-
rienced and integrated mystical states of awareness and have found the expe-
rience of value (Roberts & Hruby, 2002). Such experiences of alternate states 
can serve to help therapists embody the empathetic abiding presence called 
for in this work, as well as tolerance for moments in psychedelic sessions in 
which the participant is experiencing paradoxical, intense emotional and 
physical states. Indeed, this competency is reflective of the common psyche-
delic outcome in which volunteers can find themselves capable of greater 
empathy and openness, with concomitant trust in the unfolding process of 
psychological transformation.
Competency 2: Trust Enhancement
Related to an empathetic abiding presence, the therapist is skilled in enhanc-
ing trust in three arenas: the volunteer’s view of the therapist as a trustwor-
thy guide; the participant’s trust in their own inner healing capacity; and the 
ability to reliably normalize for the participant that paradoxical transforma-
tions and radically unexpected moments in sessions are to be expected, and 
thus trusted as part of the process. These aspects of trust enhancement 
capacities enable the therapist to support the participants’ engagement in 
making meaningful sense of their lives and inner healing processes. As with 
Rogers’s (1961) model, current researchers see the quality of trustworthi-
ness as key to creating safety in the treatment sessions (Johnson et al., 2008; 
MacLean et  al., 2011); building the therapeutic relationship (Greer & 
Tolbert, 1998; Grob, 2002; Jerome et al., 2013); and supporting the partici-
pant’s increased trust in others and their trust in self, which can be experi-
enced in sessions as “a unity with oneself” (Passie, 2012). One component 
skill needed is to be knowledgeable about the types of subjective states that 
participants may experience and adroitly convey normalization of these 
states during preparation.
Participants will be reminded that difficult emotions, including grief, rage and 
fear or panic, may arise during MDMA-assisted psychotherapy sessions, and 
that sometimes the process can produce surprising and profound experiences 
even in people without any psychiatric conditions. (Mithoefer, 2009, p. 32)


Phelps	
15
This latter point is a key consideration for psychedelic therapists since part 
of their work in optimizing the set and setting is to consistently respond in 
ways designed to enhance the participant’s trust in their own inner healing 
process. This capacity is embodied in the therapist who is a role-model for 
the participant in terms of her or his own trust in the unfolding process within 
the sessions. This necessitates a welcoming attitude and openness toward the 
full range of emerging affective experiences (Grof, 1998; Lennard & Hewitt, 
1960; Richards et al., 1972). In MDMA therapy with trauma, the “therapists 
work with the participant to establish a sense of safety, trust, and openness, as 
well as to emphasize the necessity of trusting the wisdom of the participant’s 
innate capacity to heal the wounds of trauma” (Mithoefer, 2016, p. 5). The 
qualities of therapist openness to various ontologies and a personal embodi-
ment of multiple ways of knowing are foundational for the development of 
this trust enhancement competency. As an example of these therapist quali-
ties, Maté (2010) observes that trustworthiness as an addiction therapist 
entails the practitioner’s full acceptance and honoring of addicts, particularly 
while the patients are in altered states of consciousness. Stanislav Grof (1980) 
draws out the connection among a trust in oneself, the therapeutic relation-
ship, and trustworthiness in the therapist:
A good therapeutic relationship helps the patient to let go of psychological 
defenses, surrender to the experience, and endure the difficult periods of 
sessions characterized by intense physical and emotional suffering or confusion. 
The quality of the therapeutic relationship is essential for working through on 
of the most crucial situations in psychedelic therapy, the crisis of trust. (p. 90)
Being consistently trustworthy as a guiding therapist during psychedelic-
assisted therapy research contributes to the participant’s felt sense of a stable 
and safe set and setting.
This trustworthiness is essential for a participant’s willingness to endure 
the challenges of making meaning of the broad ranging material emerging 
from psychedelic sessions. This capacity to normalize unfamiliar or challeng-
ing material is augmented by therapeutic skills in the facilitation of an 
enhanced meaning-making capacity within the participant (Bugenthal, 1978). 
The journey of making meaning from psychedelic sessions is paramount in 
positive therapeutic outcomes and the concomitant increase in a sense of 
quality of life (Griffiths, Richards, Johnson, McCann, & Jesse, 2008; Savage, 
Savage, Fadiman, and Harmon, 1964). Bossis (2014) observes that “if the 
search for meaning is successfully accomplished, patients may experience a 
sense of renewal, greater self-awareness, personal growth, and an enhanced 
appreciation for life, nature, and greater compassion for others” (p. 252).


16	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
Carhart-Harris et al. (2017) and Preller et al. (2017) have recently shown 
breakthrough findings of neural correlates to cognitive fluidity in attributions 
of relevance and to meaning-making capacity in relation to psilocybin and 
LSD ingestion, respectively. In Preller et al. (2017), enhanced meaning mak-
ing and relevance attributions were most the highly weighted subjective vari-
ables in a path analysis of outcome. The trust-enhancing therapist is competent 
in helping the participant cultivate multifocal viewpoints for making sense of 
what may reveal itself as meaningful during psychedelic-assisted therapy.
Competency 3: Spiritual Intelligence
Therapists who are competent in psychedelic-assisted therapy have knowl-
edge and values that can be described as a spiritual intelligence that “goes 
beyond conventional psychological development. In addition to self-aware-
ness, it implies awareness of our relationship to the transcendent, to each 
other, to the earth and all beings” (Vaughan, 2002, p. 18). One can liken this 
intelligence to a deep understanding and embodied experience of entelechy, 
which is
a philosophical term, referring to a meaningful process of psychological and/or 
spiritual content emerging from within the field of consciousness in a wise and 
orderly manner. I have come to believe that each person ‘s psyche is infinitely 
wiser than the egos of the patient and therapist (or traveler and guide) and, if 
trusted, will manifest the experiential sequences of imagery, memories, 
emotions, revelations and insights needed to facilitate conflict-resolution, 
communication with the sacred realms of the Self, and healing. (Richards, 
2003, p. 33)
Spiritual intelligence is evidenced by knowledge of the process of entelechy, 
having existential meaning-making capacities (Emmons, 2003) and familiar-
ity with mystical states of consciousness (King & DiCecco, 2009).
Careful considerations of the descriptions by Passie (2012), Bossis (2014), 
and Richards (2014) of the qualities of experiences within transpersonal and 
mystical realms of consciousness reveal descriptors of spiritual intelligence 
in the competent therapist. Passie (2012) describes a set of six characteristic 
elements of transpersonal experience with MDMA, which are aspects of spir-
itual intelligence: (a) ability to open up toward inner awareness, (b) feeling 
free to accept oneself, (c) feelings of relaxed detachment to an extent that 
everything appears safe, (d) a felt contact with an inner core, (e) a feeling for 
what love is, and (f) awareness of nonmaterial aspects of being and happi-
ness. Competent therapists with spiritual intelligence have knowledge and 


Phelps	
17
values related to what Bossis (2014) describes in his derivation of four themes 
of experience from psilocybin in end-of-life anxiety research: (a) transcen-
dence into the nature of self, (b) cultivation of equanimity, (c) acceptance of 
change and impermanence, and (d) the experience of love (p. 267).
Therapist guides with this competency have the awareness of what 
Richards (2014) describes as truth claims that are resultant from mystical 
experiences: (a) the primordial reality of the spiritual dimension of con-
sciousness, (b) the indestructible nature of this form of consciousness, (c) 
interrelatedness within the great unity of all human beings and perhaps all life 
forms, (d) agape as the ultimate energy at the core of reality, and (e) the 
incredible, awesome beauty of these states in design, visuals, wisdom and 
meaning. These qualities of psychedelic therapists’ spiritual intelligence are 
best described as an “embodied knowledge.” “All the researchers therefore 
ended up at least sympathetic to and, in several cases deeply committed to, a 
spiritual worldview” (Walsh & Grob, 2006, p. 438).
Competent psychedelic therapists embody spiritual intelligence, which is 
woven with an appreciation of the mystery of realms of transpersonal con-
sciousness (Vaughan, 2002) and of one’s own being and suffering (Richards, 
2015). Correlations of clinical outcomes of such values held by the therapist, 
and skillfully applied in psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy, will be a fruitful 
line of future empirical inquiry. These therapist sensibilities are akin to par-
ticipants’s subjective mystical experiences which are significantly correlated 
to the positive outcomes on many clinical variables in psychedelic-assisted 
therapy research.
Competency 4: Knowledge of the Physical and Psychological 
Effects of Psychedelics
The components of this expertise range from knowledge of the anthropology 
of shamanism; neurobiology, neuropharmacology, and drug dispositions; 
skills in the creation of safe and artful sets and settings; and optimally, knowl-
edge from subjective, phenomenological experience of personal psychedelic-
assisted therapy. The work of contemporary psychedelic therapy and research 
has benefited from knowledge of ancient and contemporary indigenous prac-
tices of ceremonial use of plant medicines, which have time-honored sets and 
settings. Psychedelic scholars have noted the need for guides in psychedelic-
assisted therapy to have in-depth, theoretical, and experiential knowledge of 
the cross-cultural roots of the global use of plant medicines (Bravo & Grob, 
1989; Grob & Dobkin de Rios, 2013; Metzner, 1998; Narby, 1998; Smith 
et al., 2004). Schultes (1979) contributed to this discussion early in the past 


18	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
century when describing the dedication and skill of leaders in guiding inquiry 
and healing with peyote in southwestern and Mexican indigenous communi-
ties. Expertise in this area can range from the therapeutic application of the 
anthropology of shamanism, knowledge of ethnobotany, and skillful, artful 
inclusion of ceremonial aspects of healing within community (Davis, 1996; 
Furst, 1976; Labate, 2014; McKenna, 2007; Schultes, 1979; Smith, 1988; 
Wasson, Hofmann, & Ruck, 2008).
Researchers have reiterated that therapists need to be thoroughly knowl-
edgeable in all aspects of current best practices for creating appropriate set 
and setting for safe and optimal outcomes. These skills include competence 
in the thorough assessment for eligibility of candidates for psychedelic-
assisted therapy; informed knowledge of contraindications for such partici-
pation; and experience in building rapport while working closely with a 
cotherapist, as well as with a multidisciplinary treatment team (Greer & 
Tolbert, 1998; Johnson et al., 2008; Passie, 2012). The authoritative com-
pendium of safety procedures for psilocybin-assisted therapy from Johnson 
et al. (2008) is an oft-referenced summary of the wisdom on safety proce-
dures and ethical practices. Knowledge is necessary regarding risk assess-
ment and mitigation for acute, difficult effects, such as the potential 
overwhelming distress of dysphoric somatic, emotional, and existential 
experiences in a session. The therapist “should be knowledgeable about the 
medical and psychological markers of potential adverse reactions to the 
drug” (Johnson et al., 2008, p. 610). Knowledge of hallucinogen persisting 
perception disorder, preexisting conditions, and clinical reports of unusual 
drug reactions is of key importance in this competency. 
Psychedelic therapists need to be astute in theories of child and adult 
development, as sessions of psychedelic-assisted therapies often reveal the 
participant’s current developmental challenges and accompanying life nar-
ratives. A related skill is the requirement that the therapists successfully 
know how to persuade the volunteers to stay onsite, to refrain from destruc-
tive acts to self, other, or property; and from sexual activities; and to follow 
therapists’ instructions for safety (Greer & Tolbert, 1986; Harmon, McKim, 
Mogar, Fadiman, & Stolaroff, 1966; Shulgin, 2001). Therapist guides in 
double-blinded comparison treatment groups need to understand all the 
nuances and limitations to their behavior in order to keep the integrity of the 
blind intact through the duration of the study (Griffiths et al., 2006). In terms 
of creating an artful and aesthetic physical environment for the session, there 
are excellent and thorough references on the use of music, flowers, art, light-
ing, chalices, the décor, furniture, and a personal altar for the participant 
(Bonny & Pahnke, 1972; Cooper, 2014; Grob, 2002; Kaelen et al., 2015; 
Mithoefer, 2009; Fadiman, 2011; Metzner, 2015; Richards, 2009).


Phelps	
19
Psychedelic therapist guides should be competent in their knowledge in 
anatomy and physiology; neurobiology; pharmacology; drug disposition and 
interactions; and neuropharmacology of psychedelic drugs (Grob et al., 2013; 
Hoffer & Osmond, 1967; Nichols, 2004; Pahnke & Richards, 1966; Walsh & 
Grob, 2006). Familiarity with clinical narratives on the normative effects of 
different psychedelic drugs at varying dosages in a variety of sets and settings 
is highly instructive as well (Abramson, 1956; Fadiman, 2011; Metzner, 
2013, 2015; Stolaroff, 1997). Related to these drug-related knowledge base 
competencies is an issue in the field that is agreed on in principle, but became 
illegal to enact after MDMA was deemed a Schedule I drug by the FDA in 
1985. Since the 1950s, there has been agreement about the essential need for 
any medical personnel and therapists working with psychedelic-assisted ther-
apies to have personal experiences with the drugs in a safe set and setting 
(Grof, 2005; Hoffer & Osmond, 1967; Metzner, 2015; Mithoefer, 2009; 
Sherwood et al., 1962). In his recent book, Richards (2015) echoes the per-
spective of many scholars and therapists that the capacities of therapists are 
enhanced when they are experienced themselves with the psychedelic 
medicine(s) with which they are conducting therapy and research:
Besides gaining knowledge of the different terrains within the mind, which is 
likely to increase the practitioner’s empathy and effectiveness when working 
with future patients, sensitivity to the potency of factors such as trust, honesty, 
courage, and openness is likely to be enhanced. (p. 148)
In the 1990s when research began again under FDA approval, the discus-
sion among scholars in the field revolved around the dilemma of promoting 
this valuable competency-based training when it had been deemed illegal for 
everyone except participants in the approved clinical trials. Grof (1980) states 
that from his viewpoint “it is impossible for the future LSD therapist to 
acquire deeper understanding of the process without first-hand exposure” (p. 
101). Shulgin (2001) reiterates that with psychedelics the therapist them-
selves “MUST have had this kind of emotional and spiritual journey, if [he or 
she] asks a client to undergo it” (p. 201, emphasis in original). Earlier, Hoffer 
and Osmond (1967) observed that when having a psychedelic therapeutic 
session, if a therapist “has had a psychedelic reaction he will understand a 
similar reaction in his patients and if he has a psychotomimetic reaction he 
will sympathize with this kind of reaction in his patient” (p. 109). Swiss and 
German health authorities have actually required that therapists in a psyche-
delic study first take that drug as specified by the protocol with which they 
are working (Strassman, 2010). The Czech model in the 1950s required five 
personal sessions and 30 sessions as a guide as a requirement in a therapist’s 


20	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
training (Grof, 2005). Researchers at MAPS successfully gained FDA 
approval to allow training therapists to be participants in a Phase 1 study with 
healthy subjects (Mithoefer, 2009). This unique and strategic protocol has 
allowed for the personal experience of MDMA for the MAPS fully trained 
therapists.
Competency 5: Therapist Self-Awareness and Ethical Integrity
This competency relates to six components of the therapist’s acumen related 
to: self-awareness of personal motives for this work; integrity in protecting 
boundaries with the volunteers; well-developed capacities for building ther-
apeutic alliances; skills in attachment theories, and transference-counter-
transference analysis; and personal self-care (which protects both the 
therapist guide and the volunteers). A core component of this competency is 
a capacity to wisely reflect on one’s motives when conducting psychedelic 
therapy while simultaneously working with participants’ attachment and 
transferential processes (Fisher & Martin, 1969; Grof, 1968; Sherwood 
et al., 1962; Strassman, 2001). The consensus is that psychedelic therapists 
should work closely with a clinical supervisor on these issues that invariably 
occur. Transferential issues have been seen to arise more often in higher 
dose treatment, depending on the emerging unconscious processes (Grof, 
1980; Lennard & Hewitt, 1960; Strassman, 2010; Yensen & Dryer, 1992), 
but are not likely to lead to idealization of the therapist (Cohen & Ditman, 
1963; Passie, 2012). In sessions in which transference is triggered, “there is 
little doubt that a Jungian analyst will find many archetypes nor will Freud’s 
disciples lack early memories of Oedipal conflict” (Hoffer & Osmond, 1967, 
p. 109).
Researchers have highlighted the need for therapists to scrutinize their 
responses in countertransference with participants in each step of the treat-
ment, particularly during the psychedelic sessions. Given the intensity of 
affect that can emerge, “the therapist can all too easily be drawn into acting 
out with a patient, actually preventing the patient from gaining insight” 
(Buckman, 1967, p. 90). Fadiman (2011) reports clinical findings that the 
participants “became distressed when the guide had become unsettled, uncer-
tain or upset” (p. 21). Learning to not directly enact roles in response to the 
participant’s unconscious material during sessions is a key skill in this com-
petency (Blewett & Chwelos, 1959; Greer & Tolbert, 1986; Passie, 2012; 
Strassman, 2010). Sherwood et al. (1962) reported that psychedelic therapy 
“tends to discourage any sort of long-term dependency or transference rela-
tionship with the therapist” (p. 72). In a unique balance that characterizes 
psychedelic therapy, this special quality of the transference analysis “is 


Phelps	
21
indispensable and the nonreinforcing and nonresponding attitude of the ther-
apist is a necessary prerequisite enabling the patient to reach the core experi-
ence” (Grof, 1968, p. 465).
The client sets the goals for himself, the therapist accepts those goals and 
accepts the fact that only the client can achieve them. A dependency transfer 
relationship to the therapist is not sought, but rather the dependency is placed 
on that source of information within the client which is made accessible by the 
drugs so that the client develops a reliance on those aspects of his own 
developing states of consciousness. (Fisher & Martin, 1969, p. 69)
These aspects of the therapeutic alliance building are thoroughly sup-
ported, of course, by first four competencies of the therapist guide: empa-
thetic abiding presence; trust enhancement capacities; spiritual intelligence; 
and knowledge of and skills in safe, informed sets and settings. The field of 
psychedelic research “demands very high requirements in the training and 
experience of therapists, who must always comport themselves with good 
psychotherapeutic skills and a high degree of personal integrity” (Passie, 
2012, p. 67). Grof (1980) recommends the cultivation of thorough self-reflec-
tion and becoming conscious of impulses to act impressively and to demon-
strate power or authority with participants. Metzner (2015) cautions therapists 
to be ever aware of the potential for their own grandiosity and the overideal-
izing of their perceptions of what is meaningful in states of consciousness 
associated with psychedelic-assisted therapy. 
Self-awareness of power dynamics is very important when supporting the 
sense of safety felt by participants from underrepresented populations, such as 
people of color and LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer) 
identified persons. Competency in these regards can avert ethical pitfalls that 
might otherwise be at risk during the psychological activation by the medicine 
(Dahlberg, 1967; Naranjo, 2013). An adjunct to this ability to self-reflect is the 
guide’s self-care skills, so as to avoid compassion fatigue and to process what 
happened in sessions with her or his research team (Cooper, 2014; Eisner & 
Cohen, 1958; Smith, 1988). “It is important that therapists continue doing their 
own inner work and that they take time for regular debriefing with the co-
therapist” (Mithoefer, 2016, p. 57). These skills of integrity and ethical behav-
ior protect both the volunteer and the guide from relational outcomes that could 
hamper the effectiveness of psychedelic-assisted therapy. The last component 
of this competency is an adoption of and acting within guidelines in relevant 
ethical codes (in addition to the ethical guidelines of one’s profession).
For further consideration, there has been fruitful work on the creation of 
ethical guidelines specific to guiding people who are on spiritual paths, guiding 


22	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
in Holotropic Breathwork, guiding psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy, and 
working on collaborative multidisciplinary teams. The Code of Ethics for 
Spiritual Guides from the CSP (Jesse, 1995) is a milestone in the crucial period 
of the FDA’s agreement for psychedelic research to begin anew in the 1990s. 
The collective collaboration of psychedelic elders and scholars within CSP was 
seminal in catalyzing the heft of the current renaissance in psychedelic research. 
CSP regarded ethics as foundational for its subsequent work, which encom-
passed matters of religious freedom and instituting university research with 
psilocybin, particularly when given experimentally to healthy volunteers. The 
CSP code of ethics has nine foci: intention, serving society, serving individuals, 
competence, integrity, quiet presence, not for profit, tolerance, and peer review. 
The code was developed by CSP for “guides” to be inclusive of, but not 
restricted to, community members who “feel called to assist others along spiri-
tual paths, and who are known as ministers, rabbis, pastors, curanderas, sha-
mans, priests, or other titles” (n.p.). Given that many psychedelic therapists see 
their work as potentially aiding people on their spiritual paths, this code is an 
invaluable resource.
Cooper (2014) and her team have adapted aspects of the CSP code and 
professional codes for the Usona Guide Manual for an FDA-approved study 
on the pharmacokinetics of psilocybin. As part of that manual, the Usona 
Code of Ethics for Entheogen Guides in a Research Setting contains guide-
lines for therapist guides in the areas of intention, integrity, competence, 
health and safety, healthy boundaries, service to individuals, and service to 
society. (The term “entheogen,” translated as “the eliciting of the divine 
within,” is a newer word used by a growing number of scholars and research-
ers instead of the term “psychedelic”, translated as “mind-manifesting.”) A 
third set of relevant ethical guidelines, Ethics for Holotropic Breathwork 
Practitioners (Grof Transpersonal Training [GTT], 2016a), outlines ethical 
behavior in the areas of commitments, confidentiality, safety, boundaries, 
peer review, community, and dual relationships. Finally, members of the 
Interprofessional Professionalism Collaborative, representing national asso-
ciations in psychology and medical specialties, have created a list of values 
and ethical behaviors for use in multi-disciplinary care-giving teams in medi-
cal settings (Hammer, et al., 2012). The Interprofessional Professionalism 
Collaborative delineated 43 attitudes and valued behaviors, such as respect 
for colleagues in other disciplines, collaboration and team-building skills, 
and values that are client- and family-centered. In sum, any therapist guide 
needs to adhere to the ethical competencies outlined by their profession, their 
practice/research protocols in their professional setting(s), and would do well 
to adopt relevant sections of these four sets of ethical and values-based guide-
lines for their research and practice setting.


Phelps	
23
Competency 6: Proficiency in Complementary Techniques
The primary components of this competency are skills and knowledge that 
form a toolbox of complementary therapeutic methods to use in various 
phases of the therapy and research. Many types of complementary therapeu-
tic skills have been explored for the early preparation phase, to bring closure 
within the psychedelic session itself, or for use during integration sessions 
(Grob, 2002). These additional skills and therapeutic methods used by guides 
include somatic-oriented techniques such as Holotropic Breathwork (Grof, 
2009; Mithoefer, 2009; Taylor, 2007); stress inoculation, therapeutic body 
work, and touch (Cooper, 2014; Eisner & Cohen, 1958; Johnson et al., 2008; 
Mithoefer, 2016); techniques of eye-gazing at a mirror or with the therapist 
(Abramson, 1967; Eisner & Cohen, 1958; Grof, 1968); felt sensing and 
focusing (Danforth, 2009); and somatic experiencing and sensorimotor thera-
pies (Dahlberg, 1967; Mithoefer et al., 2013; Taylor, 2007). 
Other competencies that have been found to be useful are guided affective 
imagery (Bonny & Pahnke, 1972; Leuner, 1969; Richards, 2015); meditation 
during integration periods (Griffiths et al., 2011; Watts, 1970); psychoanaly-
sis (Grof, 1968; Naranjo, 2013); the Bonny Method of Guide Imagery and 
Music and expressive arts therapy (Bonny & Savary, 1973); logotherapy, 
existential, and narrative therapy (Bossis, 2014); posthypnotic suggestions 
(Hastings, 2006); family-oriented techniques with photos or analytic inquiry 
such as Internal Family Systems work (Mithoefer, 2016; Stolaroff, 1997); 
hakomi, gestalt, voice dialogue, and psychosynthesis (Cooper, 2014; 
Mithoefer, 2016); and shadow work (Grof, 1968; Shulgin, 2001). Depending 
on the particular protocol and therapeutic issues, a multivaried skill-set in 
these types of methods is called for in a proficient psychedelic therapist.
Horizons of Psychedelic Therapist Training
With rare exception, there is a consensus that there needs to be specialized 
training for professionals to be proficient in psychedelic-assisted psychother-
apy (Cohen & Ditman, 1963; Kurland et al., 1973; Mithoefer, 2016; Pahnke 
& Richards, 1966; Strassman, 2010). Clearly, the clinical results are profound 
and more professionals should be trained to support it. Further evidence of 
need for skilled therapists, clergy, and medical professionals is found in the 
2015 national survey data that that 1.2 million people over age 12 reported 
taking a hallucinogen in the past month (Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, 2016). This group represents a much larger population 
that would immediately benefit from a significant rise in the availability of 
clinical expertise for helping with risk mitigation and the after-effects of such 


24	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
experiences in less than ideal sets and settings. Additionally, after Phase 3 
trials are sufficiently underway, drug researchers can seek FDA-approval for 
what are known as expanded access programs: research and clinical pro-
grams serving patients who are deemed to have “a serious or life-threatening 
disease or condition and no other comparable or satisfactory therapeutic 
options” (FDA, 2013, p. 6). If this happens with MDMA and/or psilocybin, 
then there will be further need for therapeutic services from properly trained 
medical professionals, therapists, clergy, and chaplains to work in clinics and 
centers that have expanded access programs.
The charge of academic professional programs in psychedelic therapy and 
research is to do justice to the training of expertise in the six therapist compe-
tencies. Through the work of MAPS, Heffter, Usona, the GTT, and the 
California Institute of Integral Studies (CIIS), there are well-established and 
newly developed psychedelic-assisted therapy training programs (or in 
Holotropic Breathwork, as is the case of GTT). The leadership of Michael 
and Annie Mithoefer has been profoundly effective in the development of the 
MAPS training program for future MDMA-assisted research therapists 
(Mithoefer, 2009, 2016). The training involves didactic, practical, and expe-
riential training (as mentioned earlier, their trainees may receive MDMA-
assisted psychotherapy as part of their training in an FDA-approved protocol). 
In a well-organized mentoring program, senior Heffter researchers in clinical 
trials conduct the training for each new medical team receiving Heffter fund-
ing for psychedelic research. They provide continuity in terms of supervision, 
mentoring, and guidance in all aspects of the Heffter-funded psilocybin-
assisted research.
The Usona Institute has created a thorough and astute Guide Manual for 
training therapists in research on the pharmacokinetics of psilocybin (Cooper, 
2014). The Usona manual is applicable to other psychedelic-assisted research 
as well. The CIIS (2014) pioneered the first academically accredited certifi-
cate program in Psychedelic-Assisted Therapy and Research for training 
clergy, medical, and mental health credentialed professionals. This postgrad-
uate certificate program is currently training the second cohort of licensed 
physicians, clinical psychologists, nurses, clergy, and masters level therapists 
for advanced professional development at psychedelic-assisted therapy cen-
ters for FDA-approved research and future expanded access programs. The 6 
competencies and 12 curricular domains of study, which follow, are central to 
the learning outcomes and goals of the innovative CIIS training program. The 
Psychedelic Psychotherapy Training of the Orenda Institute (2015) in British 
Columbia is a cohort-based program of theory and practice for professional 
therapists who wish to learn psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy. In a related 
area of training, Stan and Christina Grof founded GTT and conducted 


Phelps	
25
Holotropic Breathwork training with the wisdom of set and setting learned 
when Stan Grof was engaged in LSD research (GTT, 2016b). The multifac-
eted GTT training enables students to learn competencies to be sitters in 
breathwork sessions (Grof & Grof, 2010; Taylor, 2007).
Twelve Domains of Training in Psychedelic-Assisted Therapy
The following curricular areas of study are foundational for any training pro-
gram designed to educate psychedelic therapists. Each of these 12 domains 
will enhance the development of several of the six therapist guide competen-
cies. Future benchmarks of success in training, derived by each unique train-
ing program, can be evaluated based on a coherent linking of competencies 
and their components to the goals and learning objectives, and to the areas of 
study that are emphasized in that program. A training program’s emphasis on 
each of the 12 areas will uniquely depend on the intended scope of practice 
of their graduates (e.g., for Phase 3 research, for expanded access research 
programs, or in future clinical, palliative, and pastoral care in clinics and 
perhaps, community-based centers). Trainees should be licensed medical and 
mental health professionals or ordained/commissioned clergy and chaplains 
who have had sufficient psychiatry, psychology, and psychotherapy or pasto-
ral counseling training and experience. This includes clinical psychologists, 
clinical social workers, marriage and family therapists, as well as physicians 
and nurses, ordained clergy, and commissioned chaplains who are well 
trained in psychotherapeutic methods. The instructors should be recognized 
scientists, clinicians, members of the clergy, and elders who have a demon-
strated expertise in one or more of the domains. The 12 curricular domains of 
study for training in psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy are the following:
  1.	 The history of clinical research and current legal status of psyche-
delic-assisted therapy
  2.	 Neurobiology, neuropharmacology, drug disposition, and drug 
interactions
  3.	 Best practices in sets and settings: preparation, psychedelic session, 
and integration
  4.	 Psychedelics and therapeutic relationships: transference, boundaries, 
ethics, and self-care
  5.	 Supervised observation of psychedelic session videos
  6.	 Variations in therapeutic models: client-centered and psycholytic psy-
chedelic therapy
  7.	 Complementary therapeutic techniques in psychedelic-assisted 
therapy


26	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
  8.	 Co-therapy methods and interprofessional skills for working on mul-
tidisciplinary teams
  9.	 Current models of consciousness, spiritual intelligence, and mystical 
experiences
10.	 Ceremonial use of psychedelics in religious and community settings
11.	 Individual and group clinical supervision during an internship as a 
psychedelic therapist in FDA-approved clinical trials or expanded 
access clinical research programs
12.	 Personal experience of being guided as a research participant in an 
FDA-approved study
Regarding the last domain of study in the absence of or as an adjunct to 
the legal use of psychedelics in preparing competent therapists, training 
programs can improvise many sources of inductions of nonordinary, alter-
nate states of consciousness in their curriculum. These include Holotropic 
Breathwork; drumming and rattling inductions; solo wilderness journeys; 
isolation tank immersion; participation as a church member in ceremonies 
with the União do Vegetal, Santo Diame, or Native American Church; pro-
longed meditation retreats; work in harm reduction or medical centers at 
events and festivals; and experience healing sets and settings in countries 
where usage of a particular psychedelic is legal. The fourfold purpose of 
such experiential training is to support trainees to develop the following: 
(a) skillful means of personal healing practices that foster spiritual intel-
ligence and empathetic abiding presence; (b) personal knowledge of the 
primacy of the inner healing capacity and the secondary impact of the 
guide on psychedelic-assisted corrective emotional experiences; (c) per-
sonal knowledge and attitude of appreciation for numinous qualities of the 
mystical realms of consciousness; and (d) a comfort with unexpected and 
difficult experiences in induced alternate states.
Much fruitful discussion and debate can emerge regarding questions of 
training in these 12 areas of study, in light of the scope of practice toward 
which the programs are training. This would include such questions as the fol-
lowing: Which of the areas of study are or are not essential for particular a 
competency? What are the best practices for educating trainees in these areas 
of study and in what kind of learning environment(s)? How should the prog-
ress of the trainees be assessed as they move through the program? In what 
ways should the training program’s effectiveness be evaluated, based on its 
scope, goals, and learning objectives? CIIS is conducting a program evalua-
tion of our first year of training in order to address questions such as these. The 
established training programs of Heffter, MAPS, GTT and CIIS have much to 
teach us about these questions as they also continue to evolve their curricula.


Phelps	
27
Renewed Psychedelic Therapy Training Conversations
As more training programs are developed in this current flux in the scope of 
practice, these six core therapist guide competencies will be essential in the 
expansion into areas of new research designs, clinical methods, and pastoral 
care in medical and community-based centers. Pahnke and Richards (1966) 
suggested long ago that such centers could include psychiatrists, therapists, 
and professional religious personnel. Increasing interest of clergy and chap-
lains in being guides and becoming psychedelically experienced would create 
welcome discourse about both how to train guides who are clergy and about 
how clergy are trained (Richards, 2009; Roberts & Hruby, 2002; Vaughan, 
2001). Should the future come to include possible applications of psychedelics 
for “the betterment of well people” (Jesse, 1994), the scope of practice and 
guide training programs may begin to include people respected in their com-
munity due to their therapeutic capacities. Work in ketamine-assisted therapy 
(Wolfson and Hartelius, 2016; Zarate et  al., 2006) will bring about more 
opportunities for trained therapist guides to use these competencies. 
There is no doubt that, during expanded access periods and beyond, some 
of the most interesting work will be done by therapists who will utilize and 
adapt wisdom both from the analytically-oriented, psycholytic research and 
from the more humanistic, client-centered frames of current clinical trials. 
There is an urgent need to address the issue of more diversity among thera-
pists in terms of increasing the participation of women, people of color, and 
those who are LGBTQ-identified. A fruitful renewal of exploration on the 
enhancement of creativity, art, problem solving, and team building with psy-
chedelics (Harmon et al., 1966; Krippner, 1968; Savage et al., 1964) will 
require the training of guides to meet different needs of set and setting.
Conclusions
The trajectory of psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy has been inextricably 
linked to the social and political forces within which it has been pursued. The 
research programs in the early decades of the 1950s and 1960s enjoyed flex-
ibility in the exploration of many variables thought to be associated with 
therapeutic effectiveness (Grinspoon & Bakalar, 1979). The outcomes of this 
research in the early years and in the past 25 years have been significant, 
iterative, and profound. Findings indicate that psychedelic-assisted psycho-
therapy can significantly increase capacities for coping and making meaning, 
increase empathy, lessen anxiety and other symptomologies, evoke life-
affirming transpersonal/mystical experiences, and enhance the quality of life. 
The contributions these researchers have made to the betterment of mental 


28	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
health and our understanding of healing in such a short period of time is laud-
able. The federal restrictions on psychedelic research since the 1970s and 
1980s have had far-reaching effects on the types of therapeutic variables 
studied. Unfortunately, therapist effectiveness and competence variables 
have not been a contender as an area of focus in the required context of dou-
ble-blind clinical trials with treatment manuals. In order to demonstrate effi-
cacy of the psychedelic medicine, therapist variables have often been seen as 
intervening variables that are necessary to control for in the research design.
Therapist competencies have been discussed only sporadically in the 
wider psychedelic literature, but this review has compiled and elucidated 
identifiable trends in terms of 6 core competencies. The importance of 12 
curricular domains of study and guidelines for therapist training was expli-
cated. Should this renaissance continue apace, this compilation of core 
competencies and training areas of study can serve as a vehicle for philo-
sophical debate, research, and the refinement of the competencies and 
domains of training elucidated here. Of course, there are reasons that this 
work is important beyond the tidy design of training programs for therapist 
guides. Freedom of religion and spiritual practices utilizing psychedelics 
has been suppressed in the United States. And people with critical medical 
conditions cannot derive the benefit of accessing the psychedelic medi-
cines. What we may well be preparing for is a redemptive developmental 
stage in the life of the psychedelic research field, in which perhaps:
Interdisciplinary research and retreat centers could someday be established at 
which volunteer subjects who pass medical and psychological screening could 
receive entheogens. Some might apply to come to such centers for personal, 
spiritual reasons alone, and have little interest in research. Others might be 
willing to contribute to research. (Richards, 2005, p. 386)
The healing and transformational experiences to be found in psychedelic-
assisted exploration in therapeutic and supportive sets and settings are a 
birthright. The diligent and devoted work of the scholars and researchers in 
this field will be looked on by future generations as absolutely heroic.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank Chris Bache, Anthony Bossis, Ricci and Jack Coddington, 
Charles Grob, Robert Jesse, Ralph Metzner, Carolyn Pritchard, William Richards, 
and Joseph Subbiondo for their most helpful support of this article.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.


Phelps	
29
Funding
The author received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publica-
tion of this article.
References
Abramson, H. (1956). Some observations on normal volunteers and patients. In L. 
Cholden (Ed.), Proceedings of the round table on lysergic acid diethylamide 
and mescaline in experimental psychiatry (pp. 51-54). New York, NY: Grune 
& Stratton.
Abramson, H. (Ed.). (1960). The use of LSD in psychotherapy (Transactions of a 
conference on LSD-25, April 1959). Princeton, NJ: Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation.
Abramson, H. (Ed.). (1967). The use of LSD in psychotherapy and alcoholism. 
Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Bache, C. (2000). Dark night, early dawn: Steps to a deep ecology of mind. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Badiner, A. (Ed.). (2015). Zig zag Zen: Buddhism and psychedelics. Santa Fe, NM: 
Synergetic Press.
Baggott, M., Kirkpatrick, M., Bedi, G., & de Wit, H. (2015). Intimate insight: MDMA 
changes how people talk about significant others. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 
29, 669-677. doi:10.1177/0269881115581962
Blewett, D. B., & Chwelos, N. (1959). Handbook for the therapeutic use of lysergic 
acid diethylamide-25 individual and group procedures. Retrieved from https://
www.erowid.org/psychoactives/guides/handbook_lsd25.pdf
Bogenschutz, M. (2015). A double-blind trial of psilocybin-assisted treatment of alco-
hol dependence. Retrieved from https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT0206129
3?term=bogenschutz+michael&rank=3
Bogenschutz, M. P., & Johnson, M. W. (2016). Classic hallucinogens in the treatment 
of addictions. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 
64, 250-258. doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002
Bonny, H. L., & Pahnke, W. N. (1972). The use of music in psychedelic (LSD) psy-
chotherapy. Journal of Music Therapy, 9, 64-87. doi:10.1093/jmt/9.2.64
Bonny, H. L., & Savary, L. M. (1973). Music and your mind: Listening with a new 
consciousness. Oxford, England: Harper & Row.
Bossis, A. (2014). Psilocybin and mystical experience: Implications for the allevia-
tion of existential and psycho-spiritual distress at end of life. In J. H. Ellens (Ed.), 
Seeking the sacred with psychoactive substances (Vol. 2, pp. 251-284). Santa 
Barbara, CA: Praeger.
Bravo, G., & Grob, C. (1989). Shamans, sacraments and psychiatrists. Journal of 
Psychoactive Drugs, 21, 123-128.
Buckman, J. (1967). Theoretical aspects of LSD therapy. In H. Abramson (Ed.), The 
use of LSD in psychotherapy and alcoholism (pp. 83-100). Indianapolis, IN: 
Bobbs-Merrill.
Bugenthal, J. (1978). Psychotherapy and process: The fundamentals of an existential-
humanistic approach. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.


30	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
California Institute of Integral Studies. (2014). Certificate in psychedelic-assisted 
therapies and research. Retrieved from http://www.ciis.edu/public-programs-
and-performances/certificate-programs/certificate-in-psychedelic-assisted-thera-
pies-and-research
Carhart-Harris, R., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T., Stone, J., Reed, L., Colasanti, A., . . . 
Nutt, D. (2017). Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined by fMRI 
studies with psilocybin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 
2138-2143. doi:10.1073/pnas.1119598109
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. (2016). Key substance use and 
mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the 2015 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication No. SMA 16-4984, NSDUH 
Series H-51). Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/
NSDUH-FFR1-2015/NSDUH-FFR1-2015/NSDUH-FFR1-2015.pdf
Cohen, S., & Ditman, K. S. (1963). Prolonged adverse reactions to lysergic acid 
diethylamide. Archives of General Psychiatry, 8, 475-480. doi:10.1001/arch-
psyc.1963.01720110051006
Cooper, K. (2014). Guide manual for pharmacokinetics of psilocybin in healthy adult 
volunteers study (Unpublished manuscript). University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Dahlberg, C. C. (1967). LSD facilitation of psychoanalytic treatment: A case study in 
depth. In H. Abramson (Ed.), The use of LSD in psychotherapy and alcoholism 
(pp. 237-257). Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Danforth, A. (2009). Focusing-oriented psychotherapy as a supplement to prepara-
tion for psychedelic therapy. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 41, 151-
160.
Danforth, A. L., Struble, C. M., Yazar-Klosinski, B., & Grob, C. S. (2015). MDMA-
assisted therapy: A new treatment model for social anxiety in autistic adults. 
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 64, 237-249. 
doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.011
Dass, R., Metzner, R., & Bravo, G. (2010). The birth of a psychedelic culture. Santa 
Fe, NM: Synergetic Press.
Davis, W. (1996). One river: Explorations and discoveries in the Amazon rain forest. 
New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Degenhardt, L., & Hall, W. (2010). (Eds.). The health and psychological effects of 
ecstasy (MDMA) use (NDARC Monograph No. 62). Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia: National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre, University of New South 
Wales.
Doblin, R. (2015). From the desk of Rick Doblin: Winter 2015. Retrieved from http://
www.maps.org/news/bulletin/articles/392-bulletin-winter-2015/5917-from-the-
desk-of-rick-doblin,-ph-d-winter-2015
Doblin, R., & Burge, B. (2014). Manifesting minds. Berkeley, CA: Evolver Editions.
Echenhofer, F. (2011). Ayahuasca shamanic visions: Integrating neuroscience, psy-
chotherapy, and spiritual perspectives. In B. M. Stafford (Ed.), A field guide to a 
new meta-field: Bridging the humanities-neurosciences paradigm (pp. 153-203). 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


Phelps	
31
Eisner, B., & Cohen, S. (1958). Psychotherapy with lysergic acid diethylamide. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 127, 528-539.
Emerson, A., Ponté, L., Jerome, L., & Doblin, R. (2014). History and future of 
the multidisciplinary association for psychedelic studies (MAPS). Journal of 
Psychoactive Drugs, 46, 27-36. doi:10.1080/02791072.2014.877321
Emmons, R. A. (2003). The psychology of ultimate concerns: Motivation and spiri-
tual in personality. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Epstein, M. (1984). On the neglect of evenly suspended attention. Journal of 
Transpersonal Psychology, 16, 193-205.
Fadiman, J. (1969). The council grove conference on altered states of consciousness. 
Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 9, 135-137. doi:10.1177/002216786900900203
Fadiman, J. (2011). The psychedelic explorer’s guide: Safe, therapeutic and sacred 
journeys. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press.
Feilding, A. (1998). The Beckley Foundation. Retrieved from http://beckleyfounda-
tion.org/about/the-foundation/
Fischer, F. (2015). Therapy with substance: Psycholytic psychotherapy in the twenty-
first century. Dorset, England: Muswell Hill.
Fisher, G., & Martin, J. (1969). The psychotherapeutic use of psychodysleptic drugs. 
Voices, 5(4), 67-72.
Food and Drug Administration. (2013). Expanded access to investigational drugs for 
treatment use: Qs and As. Retrieved from http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/
guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm351261.pdf
Furst, P. (1976). Hallucinogens and culture. Novato, CA: Chandler & Sharp.
Gasser, P., Holstein, D., Michel, Y., Doblin, R., Yazar-Klosinski, B., Passie, T., 
& Brenneisen, R. (2014). Safety and efficacy of lysergic acid diethylam-
ide-assisted psychotherapy for anxiety associated with life-threatening dis-
eases. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 202, 513-520. doi:10.1097/
NMD.0000000000000113
Greer, G., & Tolbert, R. (1986). Subjective reports of the effects of MDMA in a clini-
cal setting. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 18, 319-327.
Greer, G., & Tolbert, R. (1990). The therapeutic use of MDMA. In S. J. Peroutka 
(Ed.), Ecstasy: The clinical, pharmacological and neurotoxicological effects of 
drugs MDMA (pp. 21-35). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic.
Greer, G., & Tolbert, R. (1998). A method of conducting therapeutic sessions with 
MDMA. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 371-379.
Griffiths, R. R. (2015a). Effects of psilocybin-facilitated experience on the psychol-
ogy and effectiveness of professional leaders in religion (Ongoing clinical trials). 
Retrieved from https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/record/NCT02243813?term=j
ohns+hopkins+religious+leaders&rank=1
Griffiths, R. R. (2015b). Effects of psilocybin on behavior, psychology and brain function 
in long-term meditators (Ongoing clinical trials). Retrieved from https://clinicaltri-
als.gov/ct2/show/NCT02145091?term=hopkins+meditators+psilocybin&rank=2
Griffiths, R. R., Johnson, M., Carducci, M., Umbricht, A., Richards, W., Richards, 
B., . . . Klinedinst, M. A. (2016). Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained 


32	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
decreases in depression and anxiety in patients with life-threatening cancer: A 
randomized double-blind trial. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 30, 1181-1197. 
doi:10.1177/0269881116675513
Griffiths, R. R., Johnson, M. W., Richards, W. A., Richards, B. D., McCann, U., & 
Jesse, R. (2011). Psilocybin occasioned mystical-type experiences: Immediate 
and persisting dose-related effects. Psychopharmacology, 218, 649-665. 
doi:10.1007/s00213-011-2358-5
Griffiths, R. R., Richards, W. A., Johnson, M. W., McCann, U. D., & Jesse, R. 
(2008). Mystical-type experiences occasioned by psilocybin mediate the attribu-
tion of personal meaning and spiritual significance 14 months later. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology, 22, 621-632. doi:10.1177/0269881108094300
Griffiths, R. R., Richards, W. A., McCann, U., & Jesse, R. (2006). Psilocybin can 
occasion mystical-type experiences having substantial and sustained per-
sonal meaning and spiritual significance. Psychopharmacology, 187, 268-283. 
doi:10.1007/s00213-006-0457-5
Grinspoon, L., & Bakalar, J. (1979). Psychedelic drugs reconsidered. New York, NY: 
Basic Books.
Grob, C. (Ed.). (2002a). Hallucinogens: A reader. New York, NY: Jeremy P. Tarcher/
Putnam.
Grob, C. (2002b). Psychiatric research with hallucinogens: What have we learned? In 
C. Grob (Ed.), Hallucinogens: A reader (pp. 263-291). New York, NY: Jeremy 
P. Tarcher/Putnam.
Grob, C. S., Bossis, A. P., & Griffiths, R. R. (2013). Use of the classic hallucinogen 
psilocybin for treatment of existential distress associated with cancer. In B. I. 
Carr & J. Steel (Eds.), Psychological aspects of cancer (pp. 291-308). New York, 
NY: Springer.
Grob, C. S., Danforth, A., Chopra, G., Hagerty, M., McKay, C., Halberstadt, A., & 
Greer, G. (2011). Pilot study of psilocybin treatment for anxiety in patients with 
advanced-stage cancer. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 71-78. doi:10.1001/
archgenpsychiatry.2010.116
Grob, C. S., & Dobkin de Rios, M. (2013). Hallucinogens and related compounds. In 
R. Rosner (Ed.), Clinical handbook of adolescent addiction (pp. 213-222). New 
York, NY: John Wiley.
Grob, C. S., Greer, G., & Mangini, M. (1998). Editors’ introduction: Hallucinogens at 
the turn of the century. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 315-319.
Grof, S. (1968). Tentative theoretical framework for understanding dynamics of LSD 
psychotherapy. In J. M. Shlie (Ed.), Research in psychotherapy (pp. 449-465). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/10546-021
Grof, S. (1980). LSD psychotherapy. Alameda, CA: Hunter House.
Grof, S. (1998). Human nature and the nature of reality: Conceptual challenges from 
consciousness research. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 343-357. doi:10.108
0/02791072.1998.10399710
Grof, S. (2005). The great awakening: Psychology, philosophy, and spirituality in 
LSD psychotherapy. In R. Walsh & C. Grob (Eds.), Higher wisdom: Eminent 


Phelps	
33
elders explore the continuing impact of psychedelics (pp. 55-67). Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Grof, S. (2009). LSD: Doorway to the numinous. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press.
Grof, S., & Grof, C. (2010). Holotropic breathwork: A new approach to self-explora-
tion and therapy. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Grof Transpersonal Training. (2016a). Ethical agreements of Holotropic Breathwork 
practitioners. In Grof Transpersonal Training Application Pack (p. 19). Mill 
Valley, CA: Author.
Grof Transpersonal Training. (2016b). Grof Transpersonal Training. Mill Valley, 
CA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.holotropic.com/transtrain.shtml
Hammer, D., Anderson, M. B., Brunson, W. D., Grus, C., Heun, L., Holtman, M., . . 
. Frost, J. (2012). Defining and measuring construct of interprofessional profes-
sionalism. Journal of Allied Health, 41(2), 49-53.
Harmon, W., McKim, R., Mogar, R., Fadiman, J., & Stolaroff, M. (1966). Psychedelic 
agents in creative problem-solving: A pilot study. Psychological Reports, 19, 
211-227.
Hastings, A. (2006). An extended nondrug MDMA-like experience evoked through 
post-hypnotic suggestion. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 38, 273-283. doi:10.1
080/02791072.2006.10399853
Hoffer, A., & Osmond, H. (1967). The hallucinogens. New York, NY: Academic 
Press.
Jerome, L., Schuster, S., & Klosinski, B. (2013). Can MDMA play a role in the treat-
ment of substance abuse? Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 6, 54-62. doi:10.2174/1
8744737112059990005
Jesse, R. (1994). The Council on Spiritual Practices. Retrieved from http://www.csp.
org/index.html
Jesse, R. (1995). Code of ethics for spiritual guides. In The Council on Spiritual 
Practices. Retrieved from http://www.csp.org/code.html
Jesse, R., & Griffiths, R. R. (2014). Psilocybin research at Johns Hopkins: A 2014 report. 
In J. H. Ellens (Ed.), Seeking the sacred with psychoactive substances: Chemical 
paths to spirituality and to god (Vol. 2, pp. 29-43). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger.
Johnson, M., Garcia-Romeu, A., Cosimano, M. P., & Griffiths, R. R. (2014). Pilot 
study of the 5-HT2AR agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 28, 983-992. doi:10.1177/0269881114548296
Johnson, M., Garcia-Romeu, A., & Griffiths, R. (2017). Long-term follow-up of psi-
locybin-facilitated smoking cessation. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol 
Abuse, 43, 55-60. doi:10.3109/00952990.2016.1170135
Johnson, M. W., Richards, W. A., & Griffiths, R. R. (2008). Human hallucinogen 
research: Guidelines for safety. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 22, 603-620.
Kaelen, M., Barrett, F., Roseman, L., Lorenz, R., Family, N., Bolstridge, M., 
. . . Carhart-Harris, R. (2015). LSD enhances the emotional response to music. 
Psychopharmacology, 232, 3607-3614. doi:10.1007/s00213-015-4014-y
Kamjol, S., Kilford, E., Minchin, S., Moss, A., Lawn, W., Das, R., . . . Freeman, 
T. (2015). Recreational 3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine (MDMA) 


34	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
or “ecstasy” and self-focused compassion: Preliminary steps in the development 
of a therapeutic psychopharmacology of contemplative practices. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology, 29, 961-970. doi:10.1177/0269881115587143
King, D. B., & DiCecco, T. L. (2009). A viable model and self-report measure for 
spiritual intelligence. International Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 28, 
68-85.
Kirkpatrick, M., Delton, A., Robertson, T., & de Wit, H. (2015). Prosocial effects of 
MDMA: A measure of generosity. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29, 661-
668. doi:10.1177/0269881115573806
Krippner, S. (1968). The psychedelic state, hypnotic trance, and the creative act. 
Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 8(1), 49-67.
Kurland, A., Grof, S., Pahnke, W. & Goodman, L. (1973). In I. Goldberg, S. Malite, 
& A. Kutscher (Eds.), Psychopharmacological agents for the terminally ill and 
bereaved (pp. 86-133). New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Labate, B. (2014). Ayahuasca shamanism in the Amazon and beyond. Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press.
Lennard, H., & Hewitt, M. (1960). The study of communication processes under 
LSD. In H. Abramson (Ed.), The use of LSD in psychotherapy (pp. 199-240). 
Princeton, NJ: Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation.
Leuner, H. (1969). Guided affective imagery (GAI). American Journal of 
Psychotherapy, 23, 4-10.
Liester, M. B., Grob, C. S., Bravo, G. L., & Walsh, R. N. (1992). Phenomenology and 
sequelae of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine use. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 180, 345-352.
Linton, W. (2014). The Usona Institute. Retrieved from www.usonainstitute.org
MacLean, K. A., Johnson, M. W., & Griffiths, R. R. (2011). Mystical experiences 
occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocybin lead to increases in the personal-
ity domain of openness. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25, 1453-1461. 
doi:10.1177/0269881111420188
Maslow, A. (1970). Religions, values, and peak experiences. New York, NY: Viking.
Maté, G. (2010). In the realm of the hungry ghosts. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic.
McKenna, D. J. (2007). The healing vine: Ayahuasca as medicine in the 21st century. In 
M. J. Winkelman & T. B. Roberts (Eds.), Psychedelic medicine: New evidence for 
hallucinogenic substances as treatments (Vol. 1, pp. 21-44). Westport, CT: Praeger.
Metzner, R. (1998). Hallucinogenic drugs and plants in psychotherapy and shaman-
ism. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 333-341. doi:10.1080/02791072.1998.
10399709
Metzner, R. (2013). The toad and the jaguar. Berkeley, CA: Regent Press.
Metzner, R. (2015). Allies for awakening: Guidelines for productive and safe experi-
ences with entheogens. Berkeley, CA: Regent Press.
Mithoefer, M. (2009). A Phase 1 placebo-controlled, double-blind crossover study to 
assess psychological effects of MDMA when administered to healthy volunteers. 
Retrieved from https://www.google.co.in/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=
web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjMkpmPuuDTAhVDK48KHQS


Phelps	
35
GDwEQFgglMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.maps.org%2Fmdma%2Fmt1_
docs%2Fmt1_amend2_protocol_dec_2_09_final.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFVRSlzml
CvehQODDlO0gMkb2fuJA&sig2=T4DsnFI70wYRbjyQzWVkdg
Mithoefer, M. (2014). Exploring mechanisms of action in MDMA-assisted psycho-
therapy for PTSD (Ongoing clinical trials). Retrieved from https://clinicaltrials.
gov/ct2/show/NCT02102802?term=mithoefer&rank=2
Mithoefer, M. (2016). A manual for MDMA-assisted psychotherapy in the treat-
ment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Retrieved from https://s3-us-west-1.ama-
zonaws.com/mapscontent/research-archive/mdma/MDMAAssistedPsychothera
pyTreatmentManualVersion+8_25May16_Formatted.pdf
Mithoefer, M. C., Wagner, M. T., Mithoefer, A. T., Jerome, L., & Doblin, R. (2011). 
The safety and efficacy of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted psy-
chotherapy in subjects with chronic, treatment-resistant posttraumatic stress disor-
der: The first randomized controlled pilot study. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 
25, 439-452. doi:10.1177/0269881110378371
Mithoefer, M. C., Wagner, M. T., Mithoefer, A. T., Jerome, L., Martin, S. F., Yazar-
Klosinski, B., & Doblin, R. (2013). Durability of improvement in post-traumatic 
stress disorder symptoms and absence of harmful effects or drug dependency 
after 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted psychotherapy: A prospec-
tive long-term follow-up study. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 27, 28-39. 
doi:10.1177/0269881112456611
Naranjo, C. (2006). The way of silence and the talking cure. Nevada City, CA: Blue 
Dolphin.
Naranjo, C. (2013). The healing journey. Santa Cruz, CA: MAPS.
Narby, J. (1998). The cosmic serpent. New York, NY: Jeremy Tarcher/Putnam.
Nichols, D. E. (1986). Differences between the mechanism of action of MDMA, 
MBDB, and the classic hallucinogens: Identification of a new therapeutic class: 
Entactogens. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 18, 305-313. doi:10.1080/027910
72.1986.10472362
Nichols, D. E. (2004). Hallucinogens. Pharmacological Therapy, 101, 131-181.
Nichols, D. E. (2014). The Heffter Research Institute: Past and hopeful future. Journal 
of Psychoactive Drugs, 46, 20-26. doi:10.1080/02791072.2014.873688
Noller, G. (2009). Literature review and assessment on MDMA/Ecstasy. Wellington, 
New Zealand: National Drug Policy, Ministry of Health Publication. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.moh.govt.nz/notebook/nbbooks.nsf/0/EE5BDDAA39721D6
ACC257B8000708A11/$file/July2010Literature-Review-Assessment-Report-
MDMA-Ecstasy.pdf
Nutt, D. J., King, L. A., & Nichols, D. E. (2013). Effects of schedule I drug laws on 
neuroscience research and treatment innovation. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 
14, 577-585. doi:10.1038/nrn3530
Orenda Institute. (2015). Psychedelic psychotherapy training. Cortes Island, British 
Columbia, Canada: Author.
Osmond, H. (1957). A review of the clinical effects of psychotomimetic agents. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 66, 418-424.


36	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
Osto, D. (2016). Altered states: Buddhism and psychedelic spirituality in America. 
New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Pahnke, W. N. (1963). Drugs and mysticism: An analysis of the relationship between 
psychedelic drugs and the mystical consciousness (Unpublished doctoral thesis). 
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Pahnke, W. N., & Richards, W. A. (1966). Implications of LSD and experimental 
mysticism. Journal of Religion and Health, 5, 175-208. doi:10.1080/02791072
.1970.10471366
Passie, T. (2012). Healing with entactogens. Santa Cruz, CA: MAPS.
Pollan, M. (2015). The trip treatment. The New Yorker, pp. 36-47.
Preller, K., Herdener, M., Pokorny, T., Planzer, A., Kraehenmann, R., Stampfli, P., . . 
. Vollenweider, H. (2017). The fabric of meaning and subjective effects in LSD-
induced states depend on serotonin 2A receptor activation. Cell: Current Biology, 
27, 1-7. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.030
Richards, W. A. (2003). Navigation within consciousness: Insights from four decades 
of psychotherapy research with imagery, music, and entheogens. Journal of the 
Association for Music & Imagery, 9, 27-39.
Richards, W. A. (2005). Entheogens in the study of religious experiences: Current sta-
tus. Journal of Religion & Health, 44, 377-389. doi:10.1007/s10943-005-7177-8
Richards, W. A. (2009). The rebirth of research with entheogens: Lessons from the 
past and hypotheses for the future. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 41, 
139-150.
Richards, W. A. (2014). Here and now: Discovering the sacred with entheogens. 
Zygon: Journal of Religion & Science, 49, 652-665. doi:10.1111/zygo.12108
Richards, W. A. (2015). Sacred knowledge: Psychedelics and religious experience. 
New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Richards, W. A., Grof, S., Goodman, L., & Kurland, A. (1972). LSD-assisted psy-
chotherapy and the human encounter with death. Journal of Transpersonal 
Psychology, 4, 121-150.
Riedlinger, T. J., & Riedlinger, J. E. (1994). Psychedelic and entactogenic drugs in 
the treatment of depression. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 26, 41-55. doi:10.10
80/02791072.1994.10472600
Roberts, T., & Hruby, P. (2002). Toward an entheogen research agenda. Journal of 
Humanistic Psychology, 42, 71-89.
Rogers, C. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Ross, S., Bossis, A., Guss, J., Agin-Liebes, G., Malone, T., Cohen, B., . . . Schmidt, 
B. (2016). Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin treat-
ment for anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening cancer: A 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 30, 1165-1180. 
doi:10.1177/0269881116675512
Savage, C., Savage, E., Fadiman, J., & Harmon, W. (1964). LSD: Therapeutic effects 
of the psychedelic experience. Psychological Reports, 14, 111-120.
Schultes, R. E. (1979). The plants of the gods: Origins of hallucinogenic use. New 
York, NY: McGraw-Hill.


Phelps	
37
Sherwood, J. N., Stolaroff, M. J., & Harmon, W. W. (1962). The psychedelic experi-
ence: A new concept in psychotherapy. Journal of Neuropsychiatry, 4(2), 69-80.
Shulgin, A. (2001). The new psychotherapy: MDMA and the shadow. In T. Roberts 
(Ed.), Psychoactive sacramentals: Essays on entheogens and religion (pp. 196-
204). San Francisco, CA: Council on Spiritual Practices.
Shulgin, A. T., & Nichols, D. E. (1978). Characterization of three new psychotomi-
metics. In R. Stillman & L. Willette (Eds.). The psychopharmacology of halluci-
nogens (pp. 57-73). New York, NY: Pergamon.
Smith, E. D. (1988). Evolving ethics in psychedelic drug taking. Journal of Drug 
Issues, 18, 201-214.
Smith, H., Grob, C., Jesse, R., Bravo, G., Agar, A., & Walsh, R. (2004). Do drugs have 
religious import? A 40-year retrospective. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 44, 
120-140. doi:10.1177/0022167804263209
Stolaroff, M. (1997). The secret chief. Charlotte, NC: MAPS.
Strassman, R. (2001). DMT: The spirit molecule. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press.
Strassman, R. (2002). Sitting for sessions: Dharma and DMT research. In C. Grob 
(Ed.), Hallucinogens: A reader (pp. 113-121). New York, NY: Jeremy P. 
Tarcher/Putnam.
Strassman, R. (2010). Hallucinogenic drugs in psychiatric research and treatment: 
Perspectives and prospects. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 183, 127-
138. doi:10.1097/00005053-199503000-00002
Strassman, R. J., & Qualls, C. R. (1994). Dose-response study of N,N-
dimethyltryptamine in humans: I. Neuroendocrine, autonomic, and cardiovascu-
lar effects. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 85-97.
Strassman, R. J., Qualls, C. R., Uhlenhuth, E. H., & Kellner, R. (1994). Dose-response 
study of N,N-dimethyltryptamine in humans: II. Subjective effects and prelimi-
nary results of a new rating scale. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 98-108.
Taylor, K. (2007). Considering holotropic breathwork. Santa Cruz, CA: Hanford 
Mead.
Tupper, K., Wood, E., Yensen, R., & Johnson, M. (2015). Psychedelic medicine: A 
re-emerging therapeutic paradigm. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 187, 
1054-1059. doi:10.1503/cmaj.141124
Vaughan, F. (2001). Transpersonal counseling: Some observations regarding entheo-
gens. In T. Roberts (Ed.), Psychoactive sacramentals: Essays on entheogens and 
religion (pp. 191-195). San Francisco, CA: Council on Spiritual Practices.
Vaughan, F. (2002). What is spiritual intelligence? Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 
42, 16-33. doi:10.1177/0022167802422003
Walsh, R., & Grob, C. S. (Eds.). (2005). Higher wisdom: Eminent elders explore the 
continuing impact of psychedelics. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Walsh, R., & Grob, C. S. (2006). Early psychedelic investigators reflect on the 
psychological and social implications of their research. Journal of Humanistic 
Psychology, 46, 432-448. doi:10.1177/0022167806286745
Wasson, G., Hofmann, A., & Ruck, C. (2008). The road to Eleusis: Unveiling the 
secrets of the mysteries. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic.


38	
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 00(0)
Watts, A. (1970). The joyous cosmology. New York, NY: Random House.
Wolfson, P. and Hartelius, G. (Eds.). (2016). The ketamine papers: Science, therapy 
and transformation. Berkeley, CA: Evolver Books.
Yensen, R., & Dryer, D. (1992). Thirty years of psychedelic research: The Spring 
Grove experiment and its sequels (Unpublished manuscript). European College 
of Consciousness, International Congress in Gottingen, Germany.
Young, M. (1995). An invitation to entheological dialogue. MAPS Bulletin, 6, 37-38. 
Retrieved from https://www.maps.org/news-letters/v06n1/06137spi.html
Zarate, C., Singh, J., Carlson, P., Brutsche, N., Ameli, R., Luckenbaugh, D., . . . 
Manji, H. (2006). A randomized trial of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in 
treatment-resistant major depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 856-
864. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.8.856
Author Biography
Janis Phelps, PhD, has been a professor at the 
California Institute of Integral Studies (CIIS), San 
Francisco, CA, for the past 21 years. A licensed 
clinical psychologist and marriage and family 
therapist, she has held faculty positions there in 
the East-West Psychology graduate program 
(founded by Alan Watts) and in the clinical psy-
chology doctoral program. She has also served as 
the dean of faculty at CIIS for the graduate departments in the social sciences and 
humanities. She is currently the director of the CIIS Center for Psychedelic Therapies 
and Research. As the Center’s founder, she developed and launched the first academi-
cally accredited, professional certificate training program for legal psychedelic-
assisted therapy and research. www.ciis.edu/psychedeliccenter.
