Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-021-01267-7
INVITED REVIEW
Effects of ayahuasca and its alkaloids on substance use disorders: 
an updated (2016–2020) systematic review of preclinical and human 
studies
Lucas Silva Rodrigues1 · Giordano Novak Rossi1 · Juliana Mendes Rocha1 · Flávia L Osório1,2 · José Carlos Bouso1,3,4 · 
Jaime E. Cecílio Hallak1,2 · Rafael G. dos Santos1,2,3 
Received: 18 January 2021 / Accepted: 22 April 2021 
© Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Ayahuasca is a hallucinogenic/psychedelic traditionally used for ritual and therapeutic purposes. One such therapeutic use is 
related to Substance Use Disorders (SUDs). A previous systematic review of preclinical and human studies published until 
2016 suggested that ayahuasca and its alkaloids have therapeutic effects in the treatment of SUDs. To conduct an update of 
this previous review. A systematic review of quantitative studies which analyzed the effects of ayahuasca and its alkaloids 
on drug use (primary outcome) and other measures (secondary outcomes) related to SUDs was conducted, including articles 
from 2016 to 2020. Nine studies (four preclinical, five observational) were included in the review. Preclinical studies in 
rodents reported reductions in amphetamine self-administration and anxiety, and in alcohol- and methylphenidate-induced 
conditioned place preference. Observational studies among healthy ritual ayahuasca users and patients with SUDs reported 
reductions in drug use, anxiety, and depression, and increases in quality of life and well-being. We replicated the findings of 
the previous review suggesting that ayahuasca and its alkaloids have therapeutic effects in the treatment of SUDs. However, 
translation of preclinical data to humans is limited, observational studies do not allow us to infer causality, and there is a 
lack of standardization on ayahuasca doses. Although promising, randomized, controlled trials are needed to better elucidate 
these results. The PROSPERO ID for this study is CRD42020192046.
Keywords  Hallucinogens · Psychedelics · Ayahuasca · Dimethyltryptamine · Harmine · Harmaline · Substance use 
disorders
Introduction
Substance use disorders (SUDs) are among the most preva-
lent psychiatric disorders, being associated with individual 
(daily malfunctioning, less productive life) and public 
(criminality, socioeconomic costs) health-related problems. 
SUDs are chronic disorders characterized by relapses, com-
pulsion to seek and consume substances, loss of control 
of consumption, and the emergence of negative emotional 
states such as irritability and dysphoria. They are often asso-
ciated with physical and/or other mental health disorders, 
such as anxiety and depression [1–5].
SUDs can be caused by the use of commonly licit (such 
as alcohol, tobacco, and prescription drugs) or illicit sub-
stances (such as stimulants, opioids, and cannabinoids), with 
varying degrees of negative consequences depending on the 
drug, social and demographic characteristics of the user, 
and/or availability [1–5]. Indeed, some researchers classify 
alcohol and tobacco together with heroin and crack-cocaine 
as the most harmful drugs for both the individual and soci-
ety, whereas drugs such as cannabis and ecstasy show less 
harm [5]. Alcohol and tobacco are more readily available 
and are culturally accepted in most countries, which is 
 *	 Rafael G. dos Santos 
	
banisteria@gmail.com
1	
Department of Neurosciences and Behavior, Ribeirão Preto 
Medical School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 
Brazil
2	
National Institute of Science and Technology, Translational 
Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil
3	
ICEERS Foundation, International Center for Ethnobotanical 
Education, Research and Services, Barcelona, Spain
4	
 Medical Anthopology Research Center, Universitat Rovira i 
Virgili, Tarragona, Spain


	
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
1 3
reflected in higher harm and incidence of problematic use. 
Heroin and crack-cocaine, although less available and cultur-
ally accepted, are often associated with compulsive use and 
law and criminal problems [1, 4, 5].
Current treatments for SUDs include individual or group 
psychotherapy and/or psychiatric medications. Regarding 
pharmacological treatments, nicotine replacement therapy 
(bupropion and varenicline) is used for nicotine-related 
disorders, methadone and buprenorphine are used to treat 
opiate use disorders, and naltrexone, acamprosate, and 
disulfiram are used in alcohol-related disorders. There are 
no specific drugs to treat cannabis- and cocaine-related dis-
orders. Although these treatments show some efficacy, the 
pharmacological interventions available are not effective for 
many patients and have key limitations such as daily dosing, 
treatment adherence, and adverse effects [1, 4, 5]. Therefore, 
it is necessary to explore new interventions that may be more 
effective.
Classic hallucinogens or serotoninergic psychedelics such 
as ayahuasca, N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT), psilocybin, 
and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) are drugs that produce 
alterations in perceptions, mood, and cognition, and share 
the same mechanism of action through agonism at corti-
cal serotonin 5-HT2A receptors [6, 7]. Agonism at cortical 
5-HT2A receptors is associated with increased neuroplasti-
city in brain areas related to emotional processing, introspec-
tion, and social cognition, and this seems to be especially 
relevant for the therapeutic effects of these drugs [7–9].
Previous studies with these drugs for the treatment of 
SUDs performed in the early 1960s and 1970s showed prom-
ising results [10]. A meta-analysis of six randomized con-
trolled trials (involving a total of 536 subjects) conducted 
between 1966 and 1970 evaluating the efficacy of LSD in the 
treatment of alcoholism showed the treatment with a single 
dose of LSD significantly reduced alcohol misuse for up to 
three months [11]. More recently, the effects of psilocybin 
were evaluated in two open-label studies: one for tobacco 
[12, 13] and the other for alcohol [10, 14, 15] use disorders. 
In the first study, smoking abstinence was observed up to six 
months after psilocybin treatment, and abstinence after treat-
ment was associated with mystical-type experiences [16]. 
Moreover, persisting positive changes such as increased 
esthetic appreciation, altruism, and pro-social behavior were 
also reported 30 months after psilocybin sessions. Perceived 
preparatory counseling, rapport with the therapeutic team, 
and engagement in the treatment were considered key factors 
in achieving abstinence [13]. In the second study, psilocy-
bin treatment was associated with a significant reduction in 
drinking days up to eight months after the treatment [14]. 
Mystical-type experiences and intensity of subjective effects 
were associated with improvements [10, 14, 15]. Corroborat-
ing these clinical results, reductions in drug use in general 
[17, 18] and in tobacco use specifically [19] have also been 
reported in online surveys among hallucinogens/psych-
edelics users of the general population (using both “full” 
[17, 19], and “micro” [18] doses). In the tobacco study, 
abstinence was mediated by spiritual experience, changed 
priorities/values, and improved emotional regulation [19].
Besides the promising results regarding drug use, these 
substances have also shown the potential to treat depression 
and anxiety symptoms, which often co-occur with SUDs 
[20]. Two randomized trials assessed the effects of psilocy-
bin for anxiety and depression in patients with cancer [21, 
22] and two open-label trials assessed the effects of psilo-
cybin in patients with depression [23, 24]. In all studies, 
psilocybin treatment was associated with significant reduc-
tions in symptoms of depression and anxiety from three to 
six months after drug intake. Thus, these drugs could also 
target these symptoms in SUDs.
Another classic hallucinogen/psychedelic with possible 
therapeutic use in the treatment of SUDs is ayahuasca. Aya-
huasca is a hallucinogenic/psychedelic botanical drink used 
for ritual and therapeutic purposes by indigenous tribes in 
countries such as Brazil, Peru, Colombia, and Ecuador and 
by syncretic religions such as Santo Daime, União do Veg-
etal (UDV), and Barquinha present in South America and 
worldwide [7]. The beverage is prepared by the decoction of 
Banisteriopsis caapi and Psychotria viridis. B. caapi stalks 
are rich in β-carbolines such as harmine, harmaline, and 
tetrahydroharmine (THH), and P. viridis leaves contains the 
psychedelic tryptamine DMT [25, 26]. When ingested orally, 
DMT does not promote psychedelic effects due to degrada-
tion by monoamine oxidase type A (MAO-A). However, the 
β-carbolines extracted from B. caapi act as selective and 
reversible MAO-A inhibitors, making it possible for DMT 
to reach the Central Nervous System [25].
Evidence from anthropological and observational studies 
suggests that ritual and religious ayahuasca use is associated 
with reductions in drug use and other drug-related prob-
lems [27–31]. In these studies, increases in social bonds by 
feeling part of a community and enduring participation in 
communitarian activities (which are often intertwined with 
enhanced spirituality) seem to be key factors involved in the 
therapeutic potential of ayahuasca.
A previous systematic review [32] of quantitative pre-
clinical and human studies assessing the effects of ayahuasca 
and its alkaloids regarding drug use and other measures 
related to SUDs analyzed 10 studies: five preclinical [33–37] 
and five observational studies [38–42]. Four [33–36] of the 
preclinical studies used β-carbolines and only one [37] used 
ayahuasca.
In the preclinical studies, harmaline (10–40 mg/kg) 
reduced cocaine and morphine self-administration in rats 
[33], while harmine (5–10 mg/kg) reduced withdrawal 
symptoms caused by naloxone in rats [34] and psychostim-
ulant-related behavior in planarians (0.01–10 µM) [36]. 


European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience	
1 3
These effects could be related to the increased dopamine 
efflux produced by harmine in the rat nucleus accumbens 
shell, which was enhanced by cocaine co-administration 
(260 ± 35%) [35]. Another preclinical study showed that 
ayahuasca (30–500 mg/kg) reduced alcohol-induced hyper-
locomotion and sensitization in mice [37].
Regarding the observational studies previously described 
[32], a retrospective assessment of the mental health of 37 
UDV adolescent members and 43 controls did not find dif-
ferences in lifetime drug use, but UDV adolescents had less 
last-year and last-month alcohol use [39]. In a study assess-
ing the psychosocial consequences related to continuous 
ritual ayahuasca among 107 ritual ayahuasca users compared 
with 115 non-ayahuasca users, significant reductions in alco-
hol consumption, drug use, and psychiatric symptoms were 
observed, which were sustained at a 12-month follow-up 
[40]. Furthermore, two studies among patients with SUDs 
that were treated in ritual/clinical settings using ayahuasca 
showed sustained reductions in drug use, impulsivity, and 
anxiety, with increased quality of life, spirituality, well-
being, and neuropsychological improvements [41, 42].
Taken together, the studies previously reviewed [32] 
suggest that ayahuasca and its alkaloids were associated 
with reduced drug use in animal models and observational 
studies. Moreover, improvements in psychological (anxi-
ety, impulsivity) and cognitive (quality of life, well-being) 
measures related to SUDs were also observed. These results 
are in line with a recent observational study among healthy 
ritual ayahuasca users that reported significant reductions in 
depression, improvements in quality of life, and less use of 
prescription medications when compared with ayahuasca-
naïve controls [43]. Furthermore, these results are corrobo-
rated by open-label [44] and controlled [45] trials showing 
that a single dose of ayahuasca significantly reduced depres-
sive symptoms in patients with treatment-resistant depres-
sion. Therefore, ayahuasca could also be beneficial in treat-
ing co-occurring psychological and cognitive problems in 
people with SUDs.
Considering the above-mentioned studies, we updated the 
previous systematic review [32] evaluating quantitative pre-
clinical and human studies assessing the effects of ayahuasca 
and its alkaloids on drug use (primary outcome) and other 
psychological and cognitive measures (secondary outcomes) 
related to SUDs.
Methods
The data for the present systematic review were collected 
according to the guidelines for systematic reviews and meta-
analysis (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews 
and Meta-Analyzes [PRISMA]) [46].
Search strategy
Electronic searches were performed for studies published in 
the period from 01/01/2016 to 11/08/2020 on the Pubmed, 
Psycinfo, Scielo, and LILACS databases. The following 
keywords were used: (ayahuasca OR dimethyltryptamine 
OR harmine OR tetrahydroharmine OR harmaline) AND 
(dependence OR addiction OR substance use disorder OR 
animals).
Selection criteria and study selection
The inclusion criteria were: (a) randomized and open-label 
clinical studies using ayahuasca or any of its alkaloids in 
the treatment of SUDs; (b) observational studies describing 
the use of ayahuasca or any of its alkaloids in the treatment 
of SUDs; (c) quantitative studies with a statistical analysis 
comparing two or more groups at the same time or at least 
two different time points in the same group; (d) studies that 
used standardized instruments to assess the pattern of use of 
associated substances or symptoms; (e) preclinical studies 
using ayahuasca or any of its alkaloids in experimental mod-
els of SUDs; (f) studies published between 2016 and 2020; 
and (g) studies published in English, Spanish or Portuguese. 
The exclusion criteria were studies used as results from the 
previous review [32].
Recorded variables, data extraction, and analysis
For preclinical studies, the following data were extracted: 
year of publication, study design, sample characteris-
tics (types of animals used and sample size, weight, and 
average age of the animals), substances used (ayahuasca, 
β-carbolines, and DMT), and administration routes (intra-
peritoneal or gavage). For human studies, the following 
data were extracted: year and country of publication, study 
design, sample characteristics (sample size, the gender of 
volunteers, average age), and ayahuasca dose/treatment.
Evaluation of selected studies
To assess the quality of preclinical studies, the guide-
lines and checklist of the Systematic Review Center for 
Laboratory animal Experimentation (SYRCLES) were 
used. This instrument was based on and adapted from the 
Cochrance Collaboration RoB Tool and aims to evaluate 
the methodological quality of studies of their risk of bias 
[47]. To assess the quality of human studies, the check-
list and guidelines for studies from the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH) were used (https://​www.​nhlbi.​nih.​gov/​
health-​topics/​study-​quali​ty-​asses​sment-​tools). Grading 
was done by verifying the presence or absence of the infor-
mation required on the checklist for each article. A “0” 


	
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
1 3
indicates the information was absent and “1” indicates the 
information was present. The overall score of each article 
was calculated by dividing the sum of points by the dif-
ference of the total number of points in each scale less the 
not applicable (NA) points.
Results
Selected studies
A flow diagram illustrating the different phases of the 
articles selected for the systematic review is presented in 
Fig. 1.
Identification of studies
The bibliographic search was performed in the Pubmed, 
Scielo, Psycinfo and LILACS databases from January 1, 
2016 to November 8, 2020, with 259 papers found in the 
Articles not included
(n = 242)
Preclinical not related to SUDs (n = 90), preclinical without use
of ayahuasca or its alkaloids (n = 46), studies with ayahuasca or
its alkaloids not related to drug use or related symptoms (n = 
34), studies not using ayahuasca or its alkaloids (n = 24), 
literature review (n = 38), qualitative studies (n = 6), case
report (n = 3), and letters to the editor (n = 1)
n
oita
cifitn
e
d
I
ytlibigil
E
Articles after removing duplicates
(n = 250)
Selected articles for full text 
reading (n = 9)
Excluded articles
No study was excluded in this stage
of the process
Additional studies identified
throughout other sources
(n = 1)
d
e
d
ulc
n
I
Articles included in the qualitative
synthesis (n = 9)
Analyzed articles (n = 250)
g
nin
e
erc
S
Articles identified in the database (n
= 259)
Pubmed (n = 239), SciELO (n = 11), 
Psycinfo (n = 0) e LILACS (n = 9)
Fig. 1   Flowchart illustrating the stages of searching and selecting articles in the Pubmed, SciELO, Psycinfo and LILACS databases. SUDs: sub-
stance use disorders


European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience	
1 3
first stage. After removing duplicates and reading the titles 
and abstracts of the articles found, eight references were 
selected for full reading considering the inclusion and exclu-
sion criteria [48–55]. Another article was found while hand 
searching the bibliography of selected papers [56]. After 
full reading, no study was excluded, providing a total of 9 
studies included in the systematic review. Of these, five were 
human observational studies [48–50, 52, 53] and four were 
preclinical studies [51, 54–56].
Human studies
The summary of the main information for all included 
human studies is described in Table 1. The first study found 
in the database search was conducted by Barbosa et al. [48] 
designed as an observational cross-sectional case–control 
study. This study investigated the psychological, neuropsy-
chological functions, and substance use of 30 adult UDV 
members in the United States, compared to 27 non-aya-
huasca adults from the same region. The American version 
of Nelson Adult Reading Test (AMNART), Stroop Color 
and Word Test, Conner’s Continuous Performance Test 
(CPT II), California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT), and the 
Trail Making Test (TMT) were used to evaluate the neu-
ropsychological functions of the volunteers. To analyze the 
consumption of substances and psychological functions, 
researchers used the Medical Outcome Study Short Form 
(SF-36), the Big Five Inventory (BFI), Barratt Impulsive-
ness Scale (BIS-11), Profile of Mood States (POMS), and 
the Addiction Severity Index (ASI). Volunteers in the UDV 
group scored significantly lower in depression (p = 0.043) 
and confusion (p = 0.032) as indexed by the POMS scale, 
while also showing higher scores on the personality traits 
agreeableness (p = 0.028) and openness (p = 0.037) accord-
ing to the BFI. The same group showed higher past use of 
alcohol (p = 0.007) and cannabis (p = 0.001) with lower 
recent alcohol consumption (p < 0.001) as assessed by the 
ASI. The UDV group also scored better on memory vulner-
ability to proactive interference (disruption of new memory 
acquisition by interference from similar information that has 
been learned previously) as assessed by CVLT (p = 0.040). 
Lastly, the UDV group showed higher scores on the qual-
ity life domain “role limitations due to physical health” as 
assessed by the SF-36 (p = 0.035). It was also observed a 
correlation between prolonged consumption of ayahuasca 
and less alcohol consumption throughout life (p = 0.034). 
AMNART, BIS-11, DUREL, DSES, CPT II, RCF, and 
Stroop Color and Word Test showed no significant differ-
ence. No adverse effects were reported [48].
The second study found was conducted by Lawn et al. 
[53] designed as an international cross-sectional online 
survey between November 2015 and February 2016. This 
study aimed to assess the well-being and problematic 
alcohol consumption in a sample of 96,901 volunteers over 
16 years old from different countries. The sample was com-
prised of three different groups: ayahuasca users (n = 527), 
classic psychedelics (LSD and psilocybin mushrooms) 
users (n = 18,137) and non-users (n = 78,236). The Alcohol 
Urge Identification Test (AUDIT) and Personal Wellbeing 
Index (PWI) were used to assess the well-being and alcohol 
consumption of the volunteers. The ayahuasca group pre-
sented higher well-being compared to the group of classic 
psychedelics users and non-users as assessed by the PWI 
(p < 0.001). The ayahuasca group also scored lower on the 
AUDIT for problematic alcohol consumption when com-
pared to classic psychedelics users (p = 0.002), while scoring 
higher on this scale when compared to non-users (p = 0.001). 
There was a similar proportion of mental illness prevalence 
(people who reported having ever been diagnosed with a 
mental illness) between the ayahuasca (24%) and classic 
psychedelics users (22.4%), with ayahuasca users presenting 
a significantly higher proportion when compared with non-
psychedelic users (18.8%, p < 0.001). The “negative effects 
while high” were stronger for ayahuasca consumption when 
compared to LSD (p < 0.002) and psychedelic mushrooms 
(p < 0.001), but the authors did not distinguish in the survey 
which negative effects were felt by the volunteers [53].
Barbosa et al. [49] conducted a cross-sectional observa-
tional study to assess the impact of ayahuasca use on alcohol 
and tobacco consumption on UDV Brazilian members. The 
study consisted of a sample of adult members (18+ years 
old; n = 1947 with an average age of 39.85 years) from 
the UDV from 10 different Brazilian states compared to a 
control group composed of adults (18–34 years old) from 
the general Brazilian population (n = 7939). Sampling was 
acquired between March 2009 and August 2011. To analyze 
the consumption of alcohol and tobacco, the Brazilian ver-
sion of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
questionnaire (SAMHSA) was used. The consumption of 
alcohol and tobacco was higher for the UDV group when 
compared to the general Brazilian population for the age 
groups of 25–34 and over 34 years old (p < 0.001). However, 
this was not observed for the age group between 18 and 24 
years (p < 0.001). The UDV group had a lower prevalence 
of disorders related to alcohol and tobacco consumption in 
the 30 days prior to the data collection (p < 0.001). UDV 
members with >3 years of association with the religion were 
less likely to have consumed alcohol and tobacco in the last 
12 months, in the last 30 days or to meet the criteria for 
alcohol and tobacco consumption disorder when compared 
with members with <3 years (p < 0.005) [49].
Berlowitz et al. [50] conducted a study with a prospec-
tive observational cohort design to assess the effects of aya-
huasca on SUDs on males recently admitted to the Takiwasi 
therapeutic center in Peru for a 3–12-month treatment. The 
study focused on the severity of dependence, craving for 


	
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
1 3
Table 1   Human studies of ayahuasca assessing drug use and related measures
References
Study design/location
Samples
Outcomes
Main results
Barbosa et al. [48]
Cross-sectional case–control study
Unites States
30 adult UDV members compared to a 
matched control group of 27 people that 
had never consumed ayahuasca before
Primary: recent drug use (ASI)
Secondary: psychiatric symptoms 
(POMS), health problems (SF-36), 
personality (BFI), impulsivity (BIS-11), 
religiosity/spirituality (DUREL, DSES), 
cognition (AMNART, CPT II, CVLT, 
ROCF, Stroop Color and Word Test)
The UDV group showed lower recent 
alcohol consumption (ASI), lower 
scores in depression and confusion 
(POMPS), higher scores on personality 
(agreeableness and openness, BFI), and 
better memory (CVLT) and fewer health 
problems (SF-36). There was a correla-
tion between prolonged consumption of 
ayahuasca and less alcohol consumption 
throughout life
Lawn et al. [53]
International online cross-sectional 
drugs survey
Several countries
96,901 volunteers over 16 years old 
divided into three different groups: aya-
huasca users, classic psychedelics users, 
and non-users
Primary: alcohol use (AUDIT)
Secondary: well-being (PWI)
The ayahuasca group showed lower alcohol 
use (AUDIT) and higher well-being 
(PWI)
Barbosa et al. [49]
Cross-sectional study. Brazil
1947 UDV compared to normative data 
of the general Brazilian population as 
controls (n = 7939)
Primary: alcohol and tobacco use 
(SAMHSA)
The UDV group showed lower preva-
lence of disorders related to alcohol and 
tobacco in the last 30 days. Members 
with > 3 years of UDV association 
were less likely to consume alcohol 
and tobacco in the last 12 months, 
30 days, or meet criteria for alcohol and 
tobacco disorders compared to members 
with < 3 years or less of association
Berlowitz et al. [50]
Prospective cohort study
Peru
36 male volunteers from the Takiwasi 
Therapy Center diagnosed with drug 
abuse or dependence through DSM-IV 
criteria
Primary: drug use (ASI-5)
Secondary: psychiatric symptoms (MINI), 
emotional distress (HADS), substance 
craving (CEQ), willingness to make 
life changes (RCQ), quality of life 
(WHOQOL-BREF)
There was a significant decrease for 
dependence severity, drug use, alco-
hol use, psychiatric status, and social/
familial relationships (ASI), emotional 
distress (HADS) and substance craving 
(CEQ) comparing the participants before 
and after treatment. There was also a 
significant increase in the quality of life 
(WOQOL-BREF). RCQ showed that 
most volunteers were willing to make life 
changes


European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience	
1 3
substances, depressive and anxious symptoms, and qual-
ity of life of the volunteers (n = 36 with an average age of 
30.86 years old), one week after the final treatment day 
(average test–retest interval: 215.6 days (SD = 84.7)). SUDs 
were diagnosed via DSM-IV criteria. Researchers used the 
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) for 
psychiatric assessment, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale (HADS) to assess emotional distress, the Addiction 
Severity Index (ASI-5) to analyze the severity of dependence 
symptoms, the Craving Experience Questionnaire (CEQ) to 
measure the frequency of cravings for substances, the World 
Health Organization Quality of Life-Bref (WHOQOL-
BREF) to measure the quality of life, and the Readiness 
to Change Questionnaire (RCQ) to measure the motivation 
for changing lifestyle habits of the volunteers. There was a 
significant decrease for the dependence severity outcomes 
drug use (p < 0.001), alcohol use (p < 0.001), psychiatric sta-
tus (p < 0.001), and social/familial relationships (p < 0.001) 
(as indexed by the ASI), emotional distress (p < 0.001) (as 
indexed by the HADS), and substance craving (p < 0.001) 
(as indexed by the CEQ) when comparing the participants 
from baseline to one week after the final treatment day. 
There was also a significant increase in the quality of life 
score as indexed by the WHOQOL-BREF (p < 0.001). RCQ 
scale showed that most of the volunteers (61.1%) were will-
ing to change life attitudes [50].
The last study found was conducted by Giovannetti et al. 
[52] with a prospective observational cohort design that 
assessed the effectiveness of ayahuasca on symptoms of 
depression and anxiety related to SUDs. The study was car-
ried out with volunteers from the Takiwasi center in Peru 
admitted between January 2016 and 2018 (all males, n = 32 
with an average age of 32 years old). The Beck Depres-
sion Inventory (BDI) and Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) 
were used to assess depression and anxiety, the Treatment 
Entry Questionnaire (TEQ) was used to measure motiva-
tion to seek treatment, the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire 
(CSQ) was used to analyze satisfaction with care received, 
the WHOQOL-BREF were used to observe the subjects’ 
quality of life, and the World Health Organization Qual-
ity of Life-Spirituality, Religiosity and Personal Beliefs 
subscale (WHOQOL-SRPB) was used to assess the vol-
unteers’ beliefs. The BDI and BAI scores showed a statis-
tically significant reduction in depressive (p < 0.001) and 
anxiety (p < 0.002) symptoms when comparing before and 
after treatment (mean treatment duration 6.5 months). There 
was no statistical difference between the main drug abuse 
groups, but volunteers with opioid dependence showed a 
greater decrease in the scores of the BAI and BDI (p < 0.05). 
A correlation was observed between the decrease in the 
scores of the BAI and BDI with the satisfaction of the treat-
ment as assessed by the CSQ (p < 0.02). An increase in the 
quality of life and spirituality scores was found through the 
AMNART​ American Version of Adult Reading Test; ASI Addiction Severity Index; ASI-5 Addiction Severity Index 5; AUDIT Alcohol use Disorder Identification Test; BAI Beck’s Anxiety 
Inventory; BDI Beck’s Depression Inventory; BFI Big Five Inventory; BIS-11 Barratt Impulsiveness Scale; CEQ Craving Experience Questionnaire; CPT II Conner’s Continuous Performance 
Test; CSQ Client Satisfaction Questionnaire; CVLT California Verbal Learning Test; DSES Daily Spiritual Experience Scale; DUREL Duke University Religion Index; HADS Hospital Anxiety 
and Depression Scale; MINI Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview; PWI Personal Wellbeing Index; POMS Profile of Mood States; RCQ Readiness to Change Questionnaire; ROCF 
Rey Osterrieth Complex Figure Test; SAMHSA Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service; SF-36 Medical Outcome study Short Form; SUDS substance use disorders; TCI-R Temperament 
and Character Inventory-Revisited; TEQ Treatment Entry Questionnaire; UDV União do Vegetal; WHOQOL World Health Organization Quality of Life-BREF; WHOQOL-SRPB World Health 
Organization Quality of Life-SRPB
Table 1   (continued)
References
Study design/location
Samples
Outcomes
Main results
Giovannetti et al. [56]
Prospective cohort study. Peru
31 male volunteers from the Takiwasi 
Therapy Center diagnosed with SUDs
Primary: anxiety (BAI) and depression 
(BDI). Secondary: satisfaction with 
treatment (CSQ), quality of life and 
spirituality (WHOQOL-SRBP, WHO-
QOL-BREF), treatment entry (TEQ)
Mean scores showed a significant reduction 
in depressive and anxiety symptoms (BDI 
and BAI) between before and after the 
treatment. There was a higher decrease 
in the scores of BAI and BDI in patients 
with opioid dependence. A correlation 
between the decrease in BAI and BDI 
scores with satisfaction of the treatment 
(CSQ) and increase in quality of life and 
spirituality was found (WHOQOL-SRBP 
and WHOQOL-BREF)


	
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
1 3
WHOQOL-SRBP and WHOQOL-BREF, correlating with 
the decrease in depression and anxiety scores (p < 0.05) [52].
The studies showed an average score of 60%, considered 
medium to high in terms of quality. In the studies by Bar-
bosa et al. [48, 49] and Lawn et al. [53], the most common 
biases found were related to the size and power of the sam-
ple, blinding of the researchers during the analysis of results, 
and the data collection carried out in only one point of the 
experiment (questions 5, 11 and 12). The biases identified 
in the Berlowitz et al. [50] and Giovannetti et al. [52] stud-
ies were related to lack of blinding during data collection, 
absence of data collection at different time points, and rela-
tively small sample sizes (questions 5, 8, and 11). The results 
for the quality assessment for all included human studies are 
presented in the Supplementary Material 1.
Preclinical studies
The summary of the main information for all included pre-
clinical studies is described in Table 2. The first preclinical 
study used an animal model of amphetamine self-admin-
istration [56]. This study evaluated the effectiveness of 
ayahuasca (2 mL/kg) in modifying the behavioral effects 
(locomotion and anxiety) and self-consumption of ampheta-
mine in rats. Animals were trained to ingest amphetamine 
for 13 days with or without ayahuasca. Twenty-four hours 
after the last day of treatment, locomotor activity and anxi-
ety behaviors were evaluated using open-field arena (OP) 
and the elevated plus-maze (EPM). The rats were divided 
into four groups: control animals that received only water 
(n = 15), amphetamine group that received 0.6 mg/mL of 
amphetamine diluted in water (n = 15), ayahuasca group 
that received ayahuasca (AYA) through gavage (n = 15), 
and the amphetamine + ayahuasca group (n = 15). No sta-
tistical difference was observed in water consumption by 
animals in the control and ayahuasca groups. In the amphet-
amine group, water consumption was significantly higher 
(p < 0.05). Moreover, animals treated with ayahuasca con-
sumed less water with amphetamine, suggesting that aya-
huasca prevented the preference for amphetamine (p < 0.05). 
Animals that consumed amphetamine showed an increase 
in locomotor activity (p < 0.05) compared to the control 
group. The amphetamine + ayahuasca group did not show 
any significant difference in locomotor activity when com-
pared to the control group, but presented less locomotor 
activity when compared with the amphetamine only group 
(p < 0.05). Animals that received amphetamine spent more 
time in the closed arms of the elevated plus-maze (p < 0.05), 
while animals that received ayahuasca + amphetamine spent 
less time in the closed arms (p < 0.05) [56].
Cata-Preta et al. [51] carried out a study in mice to 
observe the effects of ayahuasca (30, 100, and 300 mg/
kg), B. caapi extract (EBc) (132, 440, and 1320 mg/kg) 
and of P. viridis extract (EPv) (3.75, 12.5, and 37.5 mg/
kg) in a Conditioned Place Preference (CPP) paradigm 
promoted by alcohol (1.8 g/kg). In this paradigm, a stim-
ulus (in this case alcohol and ayahuasca) is associated 
with a particular area the animal has access to, and by 
measuring the amount of time the animal spends in that 
area, researchers can infer the animal’s preference for the 
stimulus. Ayahuasca and EBc were administered via gav-
age, while EPv and alcohol were administered intraperi-
toneally. The results showed that ayahuasca at the dose 
of 100 mg/kg induced CPP (p < 0.05). Pretreatment with 
ayahuasca blocked the development of CPP induced by 
alcohol (p < 0.05). Ayahuasca in doses of 100 and 300 mg/
kg decreased the alcohol-induced CPP effects when com-
pared with the group treated with saline (p < 0.01). The 
1320 mg/kg dose of EBc and 12.5 and 37.5 mg/kg doses 
of EPv blocked expression of alcohol-induced CPP in the 
alcohol-paired compartment (p < 0.05) [51].
Another preclinical study in rats was conducted by 
Nolli et al. [54] to assess voluntary alcohol consumption 
and the expression of cFos protein expression (a marker 
of strongly activated neurons) in brain areas related to 
substance consumption. The animals were divided in 
five groups: naltrexone (n = 11), ayahuasca 0.5 (0.26 mL/
kg) (Aya0.5, n = 10), ayahuasca 1 (0.53 mL/kg) (Aya1, 
n = 11), ayahuasca 2 (1.06 mL/kg) (Aya2, n = 12) and 
controls (n = 10). During the experimental sessions, nal-
trexone and alcohol were administered intraperitoneally 
and ayahuasca was administered by gavage. To analyze 
alcohol consumption, the researchers placed the animals 
in separate cages with bottles containing water or alcohol 
and weighed the bottles before and after each experimen-
tal session. In addition, in each experimental session, the 
researchers exchanged the vials to avoid preference bias. 
The cFos expression analysis was made in brain areas 
associated with substance use and SUDs, including the 
medial orbital cortex (MO), lateral orbital cortex (LO), 
ventral orbital cortex (VO), nucleus accumbens (NAc), and 
the caudal putamen (CPu). The naltrexone group showed 
a significant reduction in alcohol intake when compared 
with the control group (p < 0.05). Alcohol significantly 
increased the expression of cFos in the MO in the control 
(p < 0.0001), naltrexone (p < 0.05), Aya1 (p < 0.001), and 
Aya2 (p < 0.0001) groups. This increase was also observed 
in the VO for Aya1 (p < 0.05) and in the LO for Aya2 
(p < 0.01). An increase in cFos levels was also observed 
in the NAc of the Aya1, Aya2, and naltrexone groups 
(p < 0.005). cFos expression was significantly lower in 
the naltrexone (p < 0.05) and Aya0.5 (p < 0.01) groups in 
the MO compared with the control group, but only in the 
ayahuasca group levels achieved those the of animals not 
exposed to ethanol. There was no reduction of alcohol 
consumption in the three ayahuasca treatment groups [54].


European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience	
1 3
Table 2   Preclinical studies assessing the effects of ayahuasca on rodent models of drug use and related measures
Reference
Study design
Sample
Substances/doses
Routes of administration
Main results
Godinho et al. [56]
Self-ingestion of amphetamine, 
locomotor activity and anxiety 
behaviors
Animals: 60 Wistar rats with 
22 days old. Divided in 
control (n = 15), amphetamine 
(n = 15), ayahuasca (n = 15), 
and ayahuasca + amphetamine 
(n = 15)
Amphetamine (0.6 mg/mL) and 
ayahuasca (2 mL/Kg)
Amphetamine diluted in water 
bottle and ayahuasca adminis-
tered thought gavage
Ayahuasca prevented preference 
for amphetamine reduced the 
increased locomotor activity 
produced by amphetamine. 
Amphetamine caused the 
animals to spend more time in 
the closed arms of the elevated 
plus-maze, with ayahuasca 
administration reversing this 
effect
Cata-Preta et al. [51] CPP
Animals: Male swiss mice.
Age: 3 months 
5–7 animals allocated per cage
Ayahuasca in dose of 30, 100 
and 300 mg/kg, Banisterio-
psis caapi extract (EBc) in 
dose of 132, 440, 1320 mg/
kg, Psichotrya viridis extract 
(EPv) in dose of 3.75, 12.5 
and 37.5 mg/kg and alcohol at 
the dose of 1.8 g/kg
Ayahuasca, EBc and saline (as 
control for treatments) were 
administered through gavage. 
EPv, alcohol and saline (as 
control for alcohol CPP) were 
administered intraperitoneally
Ayahuasca (100 mg/kg) induced 
CPP, and pretreatment with 
ayahuasca blocked the devel-
opment of CPP induced by 
alcohol. Ayahuasca (100 and 
300 mg/kg) decreased the 
alcohol-induced CPP effects 
when compared with the group 
treated with saline. The EBc 
(1320 mg/kg) and EPv (12.5 
and 37.5 mg/kg) blocked 
expression of alcohol-induced 
CPP in the alcohol-paired 
compartment
Nolli et al. [54]
Self-administration
Animals: 60 Male Wistar rats
Weight: 250 g divided in control 
(n = 12), naltrexone (n = 12), 
ayahuasca0.5 (n = 12), 
ayahuasca1x (n = 12), and 
ayahuasca2x (n = 12)
2 mg/kg naltrexone, 20% alco-
hol solution, and ayahuasca 
(0.26 mL/kg or Aya0.5, 
0.53 mL/kg or Aya1, and 
1.06 mL/kg or Aya2
Alcohol was self-administered 
orally, naltrexone was admin-
istered intraperitoneally, and 
ayahuasca was administered 
through gavage
Naltrexone significantly reduced 
alcohol intake. There was an 
increase in cFos expression in 
the MO in the control, naltrex-
one, Aya1, and Aya2 groups 
by alcohol; in the VO in the 
Aya1 group; and in the LO in 
the Aya2 group. There was also 
an increase in cFos expression 
in the NAc in the Aya1, Aya2 
and naltrexone groups, with a 
remission of cFos expression in 
naltrexone and Aya0.5 groups


	
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
1 3
The study conducted by Reis et al. [55] investigated the 
effects of ayahuasca treatment (100 mg/kg administered via 
gavage) on the reward properties of methylphenidate (10 mg/
kg administered intraperitoneally) in mice using the CPP 
paradigm. The study also assessed the expression of Fos pro-
tein in limbic regions associated with the behavioral effects 
of drugs of abuse (cingulate cortex, pre-limbic cortex, infral-
imbic cortex, frontal orbit cortex, shell and center of the 
NAc, ventral tegmental area, dorsal striatum, and basolateral 
amygdala). Both substances induced CPP behavior, but this 
effect was greater for methylphenidate than for ayahuasca 
(p < 0.05). When testing the effects of treatment with aya-
huasca or methylphenidate on the CPP paradigm, methylphe-
nidate significantly decreased the expression of Fos protein 
in the cingulate cortex area-1 (Cg1) (p < 0.02), prelimbic 
cortex (PrL) (p < 0.0001), and frontal orbital cortex-orbito 
lateral area (OFC-LO) (p < 0.002) in the post-conditioning 
test compared with the preconditioning test. Conditioning 
with methylphenidate, but not ayahuasca, also increased Fos 
expression in the NAc shell (p = 0.0029) and dorsal striatum 
(p = 0.0017). Conditioning with both ayahuasca and methyl-
phenidate increased Fos expression in the infralimbic cortex 
(p < 0.0001) and the NAc core (p = 0.0001). Conditioning 
only with ayahuasca decreased Fos expression in the basolat-
eral amygdala (p < 0.0001). Fos expression was not altered in 
the ventral tegmental area by ayahuasca or methylphenidate. 
When testing the effects of ayahuasca treatment on the rein-
statement of methylphenidate-induced CPP, the group exposed 
to methylphenidate and treated with ayahuasca showed 
reduced CPP behavior when compared with the non-treated 
group (p = 0.01). Ayahuasca treatment restored Fos expres-
sion back to baseline (preconditioning test) levels in the Cg1 
(p < 0.0001), PrL (p = 0.0001), and OFC-LO (p = 0.0009). 
After re-exposure to methylphenidate, this effect of was 
maintained in all three brain regions. Moreover, ayahuasca 
treatment prevented an increase of Fos levels in the NAc shell 
(p < 0.0008) and core (p < 0.0001) [55].
The studies showed an average score of 39%, considered 
low to moderate quality. The biases most prevalent according 
to the quality instrument were the absence of randomization 
in the group allocations of animals (question 1), randomiza-
tion of the interventions administered to animals (questions 
4 and 5), absence of animals’ data collection randomization, 
and absence of researchers’ blinding to treatments (questions 
6 and 7). The quality assessment for all included preclinical 
studies is presented in the Supplementary Material 2.
Discussion
In the present systematic review, all preclinical studies 
reported mostly positive results, including reductions in 
amphetamine self-administration and anxiety [56] and in 
Cg1 cingulate cortex area-1; CPP conditioned place preference; LO lateral orbital cortex; MO medial orbital cortex; NAc core nucleus accumbens core; NAc shell nucleus accumbens shell; 
OFC-LO orbitofrontal cortex-lateral orbital cortex; PrL prelimbic cortex; VO orbital lateral cortex
Table 2   (continued)
Reference
Study design
Sample
Substances/doses
Routes of administration
Main results
Reis et al. [55]
CPP
Animals: Male Swiss mice
Age: 3 months
5–7 animals allocated per cage
10 mg/kg methylphenidate and 
10 mL/kg ayahuasca. Both 
drugs were administered 
diluted in 0.9% saline as 
vehicle solution
Methylphenidate and saline 
were administered intraperi-
toneally and ayahuasca was 
administered through gavage
Both substances induced CPP 
behavior, which was greater for 
methylphenidate. Methylphe-
nidate decreased levels of Fos 
in Cg1 PrL and OFC-LO in 
the post-conditioning test. The 
group exposed to methylpheni-
date and treated with ayahuasca 
showed reduction in CPP 
behavior. Ayahuasca prevent 
an increase of Fos levels in the 
NAc shell and NAc core after 
re-exposure to methylpheni-
date and the remission in Fos 
expression in Cg1, PrL and 
OFC-LO


European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience	
1 3
alcohol- and methylphenidate-induced CPP [51, 55], and 
inhibition of some alcohol- and methylphenidate-induced 
modifications of cFos/Fos protein expression [54, 55]. The 
quality of the studies was low to moderate. On the other 
hand, ayahuasca also induced CPP in some of the dosages 
tested [51, 55], and did not reduce alcohol consumption 
[54]. Observational studies were conducted among ritual 
ayahuasca users [48, 49], patients with SUDs [50, 52], and 
classic hallucinogen/psychedelic users of the general popula-
tion [53]. Overall, results were also mostly positive, includ-
ing reductions in drug use [48–50, 53] and in anxiety and 
depression [48, 52], personality changes,48 and increases 
in quality of life and well-being [50, 52, 53]. Contrastingly, 
some studies reported greater lifetime substance use and 
mental health disorders in ayahuasca users compared to 
controls [49, 53]. The quality of the articles was medium 
to high.
Our results were similar to those described in our previ-
ous systematic review by Nunes et al. [32], but a significant 
difference between reviews was observed regarding preclini-
cal studies: in the first review most studies used isolated 
β-carbolines [33–36] and only one study used ayahuasca 
[37]. As in the present review, results were mostly posi-
tive, including reductions in self-administration of cocaine 
and morphine [33], opioid withdrawal [34], alcohol-induced 
behavior [37] in rodents, and reduced C-shape responses 
to psychostimulants in planarians [36]. As in the present 
review, observational studies in the previous review were 
also conducted among ritual ayahuasca users [38–40] and 
patients with SUDs [41, 42] with positive results (i.e., reduc-
tions in drug use and psychiatric symptoms with increases 
in quality of life).
Regarding observational studies, in the present review 
two observational studies showed that alcohol and tobacco 
consumption by UDV members was higher throughout life 
when compared to controls, but recent consumption (last 
30 days and 12 months) of these substances and related 
disorders was lower [48, 49]. This corroborates a previ-
ous study that showed higher consumption of cocaine and 
tobacco throughout life by UDV teenagers compared to a 
control group, with decreased consumption of substances 
such as amphetamines, alcohol, and tobacco in the period of 
the last 30 days–12 months at the time they participated in 
the research [39]. In comparison with these results, an open-
label study with 10 volunteers carried out with psilocybin 
showed remission in heavy and daily alcohol consumption 
after the administration of the drug during an eight-month 
follow-up [14]. The researchers correlated the effects of 
remission on alcohol consumption with the quality of the 
experience promoted by psilocybin. However, despite the 
promising results from this study, it is important to note 
its limitations, such as the lack of a control group, blinding 
of the researchers and sample size [14]. Moreover, as with 
the study with UDV teenagers, despite the promising data 
collected by Barbosa et al. [48, 49] this evidence needs to 
be observed with caution considering that the studies are 
observational and that the data collected were from members 
of a religion which uses ayahuasca as a sacrament (possible 
positive bias and difficulty in elucidating whether the ben-
eficial effects are caused by ayahuasca or the environment 
in which the volunteers were inserted).
Lawn et al. [53] reported a decrease in problematic alco-
hol consumption in ayahuasca users in the previous year 
when compared with users of other serotoninergic psych-
edelics (psilocybin and LSD), and greater alcohol intake 
when compared to the group of volunteers who did not con-
sume any of the psychedelics. Regarding the well-being of 
the volunteers, ayahuasca users showed greater well-being 
when compared to both groups. Similar data were found in 
a survey among recreational users of hallucinogens/psyche-
delics carried out by Garcia-Romeu et al. [17], who reported 
a decrease in the consumption of opioids, stimulants, and 
cannabis after using LSD and psilocybin. In addition, both 
studies corroborate data found in the online cross-sectional 
study by Johnson et al. [19], which showed abstinence or 
remission in the use of tobacco by study volunteers after 
consuming serotoninergic psychedelics.
Despite the promising data observed by these research-
ers, it is important to note some limitations present in these 
studies, such as their observational design, the retrospective 
nature of the data, and possible omissions in the amount of 
alcohol or tobacco reported to have been consumed by the 
volunteers. Also, the study samples were self-selected, so 
it is not a representative sample of drug users of the global 
population. Moreover, it is important to notice that the life-
time substance use of the volunteers from some studies was 
greater than that of controls [49, 53]. Nevertheless, a possi-
ble explanation for this fact is that ayahuasca is traditionally 
used with healing and medicinal purposes (different from 
usual LSD and psilocybin use), so people who have sub-
stance use problems may search specifically for ayahuasca 
in search of treatment. In fact, the results from the studies 
reviewed point in this direction, where recent (months to a 
year prior to data collection) drug use is reduced when com-
paring frequent ayahuasca users with other psychedelic users 
and the general population, even in cases where ayahuasca 
users showed greater lifetime substance use [49, 53]. The 
same reasoning may apply to the grater prevalence of mental 
health disorders in the ayahuasca group when compared with 
controls [53].
Two studies in the present review described patients diag-
nosed with SUDs that were treated at the Takiwasi center in 
Peru, a healing center that uses ayahuasca and other Ama-
zonian plants and healing methods in a prolonged treat-
ment program [50, 52]. Results of both studies showed a 
significant reduction of drug use by these patients, especially 


	
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
1 3
for alcohol and opiates. Moreover, there was a significant 
improvement in the quality of life, craving for substances, 
emotional stress, and a reduction in the mean scores of 
depression and anxiety symptoms [50, 52]. These results 
corroborate data from previous studies performed in heal-
ing contexts [41, 42], where a significant reduction in the 
consumption of tobacco, alcohol and cocaine was observed. 
However, besides being observational, all these studies were 
performed in the context of multiple healing practices that 
used other therapeutic techniques in the mid to long term, 
making it difficult to separate the effects caused by therapy 
from those of ayahuasca.
Regarding personality measures assessed in the reviewed 
studies, UDV members scored higher on the agreeableness 
and openness traits of the BFI [48]. It is difficult to establish 
the causative role that ayahuasca could have on the personal-
ity, since these traits could already be present. For instance, 
agreeableness, openness, self-transcendence, compassion, 
and spiritual acceptance could render those participants 
more prone to use hallucinogens/psychedelics. In any case, 
the role of those substances in the modulation of personality 
traits is still poorly investigated [59].
Regarding preclinical studies, in the present review, two 
rodent models showed that ayahuasca reduced CPP for alco-
hol [51] and methylphenidate [55]. In the alcohol study, 
pretreatment with ayahuasca (100 and 300 mg/kg), the B. 
caapi (1320 mg/kg), and P. viridis (12.5 and 37.5 mg/kg) 
extracts decreased alcohol-induced CPP, while the 30 mg/
kg ayahuasca dose did not produce significant effects and 
the 100 mg/kg dose also induced CPP [51]. Interestingly, 
in the methylphenidate study, the 10 mg/kg ayahuasca dose 
induced CPP (which was greater for methylphenidate) and 
reduced the methylphenidate-induced CPP [55]. These 
results corroborate findings from a previous study in which 
a reduction in alcohol-induced behavior was observed when 
animals were treated with ayahuasca doses of 300–500 mg/
kg [37]. These results indicate the possible antiaddictive 
properties of ayahuasca, since it diminished the preference 
of the animals to areas associated with alcohol and meth-
ylphenidate consumption. The differences in significant 
dosages observed between studies could be related to study 
design and drugs evaluated (alcohol vs. methylphenidate). 
Ayahuasca-induced CPP could be due to increased dopamine 
flow in the Nac produced by harmine [35]. Together, these 
results suggest that ayahuasca and its alkaloids could have 
beneficial effects in alcohol- and psychostimulant-related 
disorders.
Similar effects were seen in other preclinical trials using 
rats to assess the effectiveness of harmine in self-consump-
tion of morphine and cocaine [33], withdrawal symptoms 
from morphine [34], and efficacy of harmine in inhibiting 
psychostimulant responses (cocaine, methamphetamine, 
mephedrone, and nicotine) in planarians [36]. The reduced 
consumption of these substances suggest that the adminis-
tration of ayahuasca or harmine seems to decrease the rein-
forcement effects caused by them [33, 34, 36, 56].
Moreover, ayahuasca generally blocked the modifications 
of cFos/Fos protein expression (a marker of strongly acti-
vated neurons) produced by alcohol and psychostimulants 
[54, 55], and reduced amphetamine self-administration and 
anxiety and locomotor activity [56]. Nolli et al. [54] showed 
that alcohol increased the expression of the cFos protein 
in brain regions related to SUDs in animals, such as the 
orbital medial cortex, orbital ventral cortex, lateral orbital 
cortex, and the nucleus accumbens of animals. Ayahuasca 
also increased cFos expression in those areas, but animals 
exposed to alcohol and treated with ayahuasca showed 
decreased cFos expression. These results suggest a protec-
tive effect of ayahuasca in this region, at least at low lev-
els, since higher ayahuasca doses did not show any impact 
on cFos levels caused by alcohol exposure. In the study by 
Reis et al. [55], ayahuasca blocked most of the changes in 
Fos expression induced by conditioning with methylpheni-
date and/or re-exposure to this drug. Moreover, while aya-
huasca had limited effects on Fos expression, methylphe-
nidate modified it in several brain regions associated with 
the behavioral effects of drugs of abuse. This result indicate 
that the rewarding properties of methylphenidate are more 
prominent. The above-mentioned effects could be due to 
the effects of ayahuasca on dopaminergic, glutamatergic, 
and serotoninergic neurotransmission in those areas [57, 
58]. Future studies should explore other dosages and drugs 
to better understand the effects of ayahuasca on cFos/Fos 
expression.
SUDs are complex and multifactorial disorders that need 
a treatment model which targets not only the individual at 
a bio-psychological level, but also his/her social network, 
attitudes/behaviors, and family. The possible mechanisms 
of the therapeutic effects of ayahuasca in SUDs are not fully 
understood. From a neurochemical perspective, agonism at 
cortical 5-HT2A expressed in brain areas related to emotional 
processing, introspection, and social cognition, together with 
increased neuroplasticity, are possible mechanisms [7–9]. 
The effects of these drugs in limbic and frontal structures 
could be associated with the increases in cFos/Fos expres-
sion observed in rodent models of SUDs [54, 55]. These bio-
chemical alterations could be responsible for improvements 
in emotional regulation, cognitive flexibility, and disruption 
of repetitive and negative thoughts.
Moreover, the evidence on the positive effects of harmine, 
harmaline, and ayahuasca in preclinical models from pla-
narians to rodents using drugs as diverse as alcohol and 
amphetamine (reviewed by Nunes et al. [32] and in the pre-
sent review) suggest a strong biological basis for the thera-
peutic effects of these substances in SUDs. This perspective 
is further reinforced by a recent study in mice showing that 


European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience	
1 3
LSD reduced alcohol consumption and preference, with 
reductions sustained for 46 days [60]. However, a recent 
study in rats failed to find long-lasting effects of high (two 
doses one week apart) and micro (two doses per week for 
four-weeks) doses of LSD and psilocybin in alcohol relapse, 
although they observed a short-lasting anti-relapse effect 
with sub-chronic treatment (five doses across three days) 
with psilocybin [61]. To the best of our knowledge, these are 
apparently the only published work on the effects of LSD/
psilocybin on the self-administration of abused substances 
in animals. However, rodent studies with administration of 
other 5-HT2A agonists also reported reductions of drug (e.g., 
alcohol, opiates, nicotine) preference and self-administration 
[62–65]. Nevertheless, although animal models related to 
SUDs are promising, it is not clear to which extend they 
are able to model the therapeutic potential of hallucinogens/
psychedelic in humans.
At the psychological level, mystical-type experiences and 
the intensity of the subjective effects were associated with 
improvements in open-label clinical trials [12, 14–16], while 
spiritual experience, changed priorities/values, and improved 
emotional regulation during tobacco abstinence among hal-
lucinogens/psychedelics users of the general population in 
an online survey have also been reported [19]. Perceived 
preparatory counseling, rapport with the therapeutic team, 
and engagement in the treatment were key factors in achiev-
ing drug abstinence after psilocybin sessions, which were 
accompanied by persisting (30 months after psilocybin ses-
sions) positive changes including increased esthetic appre-
ciation, altruism, and pro-social behavior [13]. Furthermore, 
positive changes in personality were also verified in obser-
vational studies [48]. Importantly, although these are com-
plex psychological processes, human studies are showing 
increasing evidence that they are 5-HT2A-mediated [57, 59].
In the culture/social level, observational studies con-
ducted since the early 1990s suggest participation in syn-
cretic ayahuasca religions and treatment of SUDs with aya-
huasca in specialized clinics are associated with a reduction 
in drug misuse and related problems [27–29, 31]. These 
studies suggest that increases in social bonds and spiritu-
ality are important mediators of the therapeutic effects of 
ayahuasca. More recently, we reported that Spanish ritual 
ayahuasca users had higher scores on psychosocial adjust-
ment, stress coping strategies, and indicators of social sup-
port compared with the general population [66]. These fac-
tors could be important mediators of improvement in SUDs. 
More studies are needed to clarify the mechanisms involved 
in the therapeutic effects of classic hallucinogens/serotonin-
ergic psychedelics, at the individual and social level.
Regarding the limitations of this review, there are impor-
tant points that need to be mentioned. A total of nine studies 
were found, which is a small sample. Four studies were pre-
clinical trials with low to moderate quality. Most limitations 
were related to bias during the allocation of animals to the 
designated groups (selection bias), absence of randomiza-
tion of substance administration to animals, blinding of the 
researchers themselves (performance bias), and the absence 
of randomization of the animals chosen for data analysis 
(detection bias). Moreover, it is difficult to translate/extrapo-
late the data found in these studies to humans. The other 
five studies were observational studies with medium to high 
quality. However, results need to be carefully evaluated since 
causality cannot be established. Furthermore, two studies 
[50, 52] were carried without a control group and in a thera-
peutic center with multiple therapeutic techniques applied 
together with ayahuasca. Thus, it is difficult to attribute any 
positive results to a single event. Furthermore, other stud-
ies were conducted among members of religions who use 
ayahuasca as a sacrament. Therefore, it is difficult to infer 
if the therapeutic effects are produced by ayahuasca or the 
context. Further limitations include small samples, lack of 
prolonged follow-ups, and wide variation in ayahuasca doses 
and frequency of use.
Conclusions
Preclinical and observational studies suggest that the aya-
huasca may have therapeutic effects in the treatment of 
SUDs. Although the majority of the volunteers who com-
posed the samples of the studies had a higher consumption 
of substances (mainly alcohol and tobacco) relative to the 
control groups, this consumption was lower in the last year 
prior to their participation in the studies. In addition, aya-
huasca also increased quality of life and reduced depres-
sive and anxiety symptoms. In studies with animal models, 
the data suggest that ayahuasca can promote CPP blocking 
induced by alcohol and promote remission in the self-con-
sumption of amphetamine diluted in water. Preclinical data 
also suggest that ayahuasca promotes remission of cFos pro-
tein expression in brain regions related to drug dependence.
Despite the promising effects reported in this systematic 
review, it is important to mention that the studies have limi-
tations, such as preclinical studies, observational designs, 
and small sample sizes. Moreover, some of the data were 
collected from volunteers who used ayahuasca as a sacra-
ment, which could be biased. Because of this, greater meth-
odological rigor is required to avoid the risk of bias in future 
research with ayahuasca or other serotoninergic hallucino-
gens. Finally, no clinical trials were found in the present 
review. Future randomized, placebo-controlled clinical tri-
als are needed to replicate the data found in this systematic 
review.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00406-​021-​01267-7.


	
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
1 3
Funding  LSR, GNR and JMR received funding from Conselho 
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq, Brazil). 
FLO is recipient of Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientí-
fico e Tecnológico (CNPq, Brazil) 2 productivity fellowship. JECH 
is recipient of CNPq 1A productivity fellowship. RGS is Fellow of 
the Programa Nacional de Pós-Doutorado, Brazil (PNPD/CAPES). 
Research was supported in part by grants from Fundação de Amparo à 
Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP).
Declarations 
Conflicts of interest  The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
	 1.	 Brandon TH, Vidrine JI, Litvin EB (2007) Relapse and relapse 
prevention. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 3:257–284. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1146/​annur​ev.​clinp​sy.3.​022806.​091455
	 2.	 Koob GF, Le Moal M (2008) Addiction and the brain antireward 
system. Annu Rev Psychol 59:29–53. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​
annur​ev.​psych.​59.​103006.​093548
	 3.	 BD 2016 Alcohol and Drug Use Collaborators (2018) The global 
burden of disease attributable to alcohol and drug use in 195 
countries and territories, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for 
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet Psychiatry 
5:987–1012. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S2215-​0366(18)​30337-7
	 4.	 Lo TW, Yeung JWK, Tam CHL (2020) Substance abuse and pub-
lic health: a multilevel perspective and multiple responses. Int J 
Environ Res Public Health 17:2610. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijerp​
h1707​2610
	 5.	 van Amsterdam J, Nutt D, Phillips L, van den Brink W (2015) 
European rating of drug harms. J Psychopharmacol 29:655–660. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​81115​581980
	 6.	 Rickli A, Moning OD, Hoener MC, Liechti ME (2016) Recep-
tor interaction profiles of novel psychoactive tryptamines com-
pared with classic hallucinogens. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 
26:1327–1337
	 7.	 Dos Santos RG, Hallak JEC (2019) Ayahuasca, an ancient sub-
stance with traditional and contemporary use in neuropsychia-
try and neuroscience. Epilepsy Behav. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
yebeh.​2019.​04.​053
	 8.	 Palhano-Fontes F, Andrade KC, Tofoli LF, Santos AC, Crippa JA, 
Hallak JE, Ribeiro S, de Araujo DB (2015) The psychedelic state 
induced by ayahuasca modulates the activity and connectivity of 
the default mode network. PLoS One 10:e0118143. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​01181​43
	 9.	 Rocha JM, Osório FL, Crippa JAS, Bouso JC, Rossi GN, Hal-
lak JEC, Dos Santos RG (2019) Serotonergic hallucinogens and 
recognition of facial emotion expressions: a systematic review of 
the literature. Ther Adv Psychopharmacol 9:2045125319845774. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​20451​25319​845774
	10.	 Bogenschutz MP, Forcehimes AA (2017) Development of a psy-
chotherapeutic model for psilocybin-assisted treatment of alcohol-
ism. J Humanistic Psychol 57:389–414. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​
00221​67816​673493
	11.	 Krebs TS, Johansen PØ (2012) Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) 
for alcoholism: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J 
Psychopharmacol 26:994–1002. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​
81112​439253
	12.	 Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, Griffiths RR 
(2014) Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR agonist psilocybin in the 
treatment of tobacco addiction. J Psychopharmacol 28:983–992. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​81114​548296
	13.	 Noorani T, Garcia-Romeu A, Swift TC, Griffiths RR, Johnson 
MW (2018) Psychedelic therapy for smoking cessation: qualita-
tive analysis of participant accounts. J Psychopharmacol 32:756–
769. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​81118​780612
	14.	 Bogenschutz MP, Forcehimes AA, Pommy JA, Wilcox CE, Bar-
bosa PC, Strassman RJ (2015) Psilocybin-assisted treatment for 
alcohol dependence: a proof-of-concept study. J Psychopharmacol 
29:289–299. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​81114​565144
	15.	 Bogenschutz MP, Podrebarac SK, Duane JH, Amegadzie SS, 
Malone TC, Owens LT, Ross S, Mennenga SE (2018) Clinical 
interpretations of patient experience in a trial of psilocybin-
assisted psychotherapy for alcohol use disorder. Front Pharmacol 
9:100. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fphar.​2018.​00100
	16.	 Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR, Johnson MW (2014) Psilocybin-
occasioned mystical experiences in the treatment of tobacco 
addiction. Curr Drug Abuse Rev 7:157–164. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
2174/​18744​73708​66615​01071​21331
	17.	 Garcia-Romeu A, Davis AK, Erowid E, Erowid F, Griffiths RR, 
Johnson MW (2020) Persisting reductions in cannabis, opioid, 
and stimulant misuse after naturalistic psychedelic use: an online 
survey. Front Psychiatry 10:955. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fpsyt.​
2019.​00955
	18.	 Lea T, Amada N, Jungaberle H et al (2020) Perceived outcomes of 
psychedelic microdosing as self-managed therapies for mental and 
substance use disorders. Psychopharmacology 237:1521–1532. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00213-​020-​05477-0
	19.	 Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Johnson PS, Griffiths RR (2017) 
An online survey of tobacco smoking cessation associated with 
naturalistic psychedelic use. J Psychopharmacol 31:841–850. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​81116​684335
	20.	 Lai HM, Cleary M, Sitharthan T, Hunt GE (2015) Prevalence of 
comorbid substance use, anxiety and mood disorders in epidemio-
logical surveys, 1990–2014: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. Drug Alcohol Depend 154:1–13. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
druga​lcdep.​2015.​05.​031
	21.	 Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Carducci MA, Umbricht A, Richards 
WA, Richards BD, Cosimano MP, Klinedinst MA (2016) Psilo-
cybin produces substantial and sustained decreases in depression 
and anxiety in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized 
double-blind trial. J Psychopharmacol 30:1181–1197. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1177/​02698​81116​675513
	22.	 Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, Agin-Liebes G, Malone T, Cohen B, 
Mennenga SE, Belser A, Kalliontzi K, Babb J, Su Z, Corby P, 
Schmidt BL (2016) Rapid and sustained symptom reduction fol-
lowing psilocybin treatment for anxiety and depression in patients 
with life-threatening cancer: a randomized controlled trial. J 
Psychopharmacol 30:1165–1180. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​
81116​675512
	23.	 Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, Day CM, Erritzoe 
D, Kaelen M, Bloomfield M, Rickard JA, Forbes B, Feilding A, 
Taylor D, Pilling S, Curran VH, Nutt DJ (2016) Psilocybin with 
psychological support for treatment-resistant depression: an open-
label feasibility study. Lancet Psychiatry 3:619–627. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/​S2215-​0366(16)​30065-7
	24.	 Davis AK, Barrett FS, May DG, Cosimano MP, Sepeda ND, 
Johnson MW, Finan PH, Griffiths RR (2020) Effects of psilocy-
bin-assisted therapy on major depressive disorder: a randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry e203285. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​
jamap​sychi​atry.​2020.​3285.
	25.	 Dos Santos RG, Balthazar FM, Bouso JC, Hallak JE (2016) The 
current state of research on ayahuasca: a systematic review of 
human studies assessing psychiatric symptoms, neuropsychologi-
cal functioning, and neuroimaging. J Psychopharmacol 30:1230–
1247. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​81116​652578
	26.	 Dos Santos RG, Osório FL, Crippa JA, Hallak JE (2016) Anti-
depressive and anxiolytic effects of ayahuasca: a systematic 


European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience	
1 3
literature review of animal and human studies. Braz J Psychiatry 
38:65–72. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1590/​1516-​4446-​2015-​1701
	27.	 Grob CS, McKenna DJ, Callaway JC, Brito GS, Neves ES, 
Oberlaender G, Saide OL, Labigalini E, Tacla C, Miranda CT, 
Strassman RJ, Boone KB (1996) Human psychopharmacology 
of hoasca, a plant hallucinogen used in ritual context in Brazil. 
J Nerv Ment Dis 184:86–94. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​00005​053-​
19960​2000-​00004
	28.	 Labate B, dos Santos RG, Anderson B, Mercante M, Barbosa PCR 
(2010) The treatment and handling of substance dependence with 
ayahuasca: reflections on current and future research. In: Labate 
BC, MacRae E (eds) Ayahuasca, ritual and religion in Brazil. 
Equinox, London and Oakville, pp 205–227
	29.	 Loizaga-Velder A, Verres R (2014) Therapeutic effects of ritual 
ayahuasca use in the treatment of substance dependence–qualita-
tive results. J Psychoactive Drugs 46:63–72. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​02791​072.​2013.​873157
	30.	 Apud I, Romaní O (2017) Medicine, religion and ayahuasca 
in Catalonia. Considering ayahuasca networks from a medical 
anthropology perspective. Int J Drug Policy 39:28–36. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​drugpo.​2016.​07.​011
	31.	 Talin P, Sanabria E (2017) Ayahuasca’s entwined efficacy: An 
ethnographic study of ritual healing from “addiction.” Int J Drug 
Policy 44:23–30. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​drugpo.​2017.​02.​017
	32.	 Nunes AA, Dos Santos RG, Osório FL, Sanches RF, Crippa JA, 
Hallak JE (2016) Effects of ayahuasca and its alkaloids on drug 
dependence: a systematic literature review of quantitative studies 
in animals and humans. J Psychoactive Drugs 48:195–205. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02791​072.​2016.​11882​25
	33.	 Glick SD, Kuehne ME, Raucci J, Wilson TE, Larson D, Keller 
RW Jr, Carlson JN (1994) Effects of iboga alkaloids on morphine 
and cocaine self-administration in rats: relationship to tremori-
genic effects and to effects on dopamine release in nucleus accum-
bens and striatum. Brain Res 657:14–22. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​
0006-​8993(94)​90948-2
	34.	 Aricioglu-Kartal F, Kayir H, Tayfun Uzbay I (2003) Effects of 
harman and harmine on naloxone-precipitated withdrawal syn-
drome in morphine-dependent rats. Life Sci 73:2363–2371. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0024-​3205(03)​00647-7
	35.	 Brierley DI, Davidson C (2013) Harmine augments electrically 
evoked dopamine efflux in the nucleus accumbens shell. J Psy-
chopharmacol 27:98–108. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02698​81112​
463125
	36.	 Owaisat S, Raffa RB, Rawls SM (2012) In vivo comparison of 
harmine efficacy against psychostimulants: preferential inhibi-
tion of the cocaine response through a glutamatergic mechanism. 
Neurosci Lett 525:12–16. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neulet.​2012.​
07.​052
	37.	 Oliveira-Lima AJ, Santos R, Hollais AW, Gerardi-Junior CA, 
Baldaia MA, Wuo-Silva R, Yokoyama TS, Costa JL, Malpezzi-
Marinho EL, Ribeiro-Barbosa PC, Berro LF, Frussa-Filho R, 
Marinho EA (2015) Effects of ayahuasca on the development of 
alcohol-induced behavioral sensitization and on a post-sensitiza-
tion treatment in mice. Physiol Behav 142:28–36. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​physb​eh.​2015.​01.​032
	38.	 Da Silveira DX, Grob CS, de Rios MD, Lopez E, Alonso LK, 
Tacla C, Doering-Silveira E (2005) Ayahuasca in adolescence: a 
preliminary psychiatric assessment. J Psychoactive Drugs 37:129–
133. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02791​072.​2005.​10399​792
	39.	 Doering-Silveira E, Grob CS, de Rios MD, Lopez E, Alonso LK, 
Tacla C, Da Silveira DX (2005) Report on psychoactive drug use 
among adolescents using ayahuasca within a religious context. J 
Psychoactive Drugs 37:141–144. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02791​
072.​2005.​10399​794
	40.	 Fábregas JM, González D, Fondevila S, Cutchet M, Fernández X, 
Barbosa PC, Alcázar-Córcoles MÁ, Barbanoj MJ, Riba J, Bouso 
JC (2010) Assessment of addiction severity among ritual users of 
ayahuasca. Drug Alcohol Depend 111:257–261. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​druga​lcdep.​2010.​03.​024
	41.	 Thomas G, Lucas P, Capler NR, Tupper KW, Martin G (2013) 
Ayahuasca-assisted therapy for addiction: results from a pre-
liminary observational study in Canada. Curr Drug Abuse Rev 
6:30–42. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2174/​15733​99811​30999​90003
	42.	 Fernández X, dos Santos RG, Cutchet M, Fondevila S, González 
D, Alcázar MÁ, María Fábregas J (2014) Assessment of the psy-
chotherapeutic effects of ritual ayahuasca use on drug depend-
ency: a pilot study. Therap Use Ayahuasca. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​978-3-​642-​40426-9_​11
	43.	 Jiménez-Garrido DF, Gómez-Sousa M, Ona G, Dos Santos RG, 
Hallak JEC, Alcázar-Córcoles MÁ, Bouso JC (2020) Effects of 
ayahuasca on mental health and quality of life in naïve users: 
a longitudinal and cross-sectional study combination. Sci Rep 
10:4075. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​020-​61169-x
	44.	 Sanches RF, de Lima Osório F, Dos Santos RG, Macedo LR, 
Maia-de-Oliveira JP, Wichert-Ana L, de Araujo DB, Riba J, 
Crippa JA, Hallak JE (2016) Antidepressant effects of a single 
dose of ayahuasca in patients with recurrent depression: a SPECT 
study. J Clin Psychopharmacol 36:77–81. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​
JCP.​00000​00000​000436
	45.	 Palhano-Fontes F, Barreto D, Onias H, Andrade KC, Novaes MM, 
Pessoa JA, Mota-Rolim SA, Osório FL, Sanches R, Dos Santos 
RG, Tófoli LF, de Oliveira SG, Yonamine M, Riba J, Santos FR, 
Silva-Junior AA, Alchieri JC, Galvão-Coelho NL, Lobão-Soares 
B, Hallak JEC, Arcoverde E, Maia-de-Oliveira JP, Araújo DB 
(2019) Rapid antidepressant effects of the psychedelic ayahuasca 
in treatment-resistant depression: a randomized placebo-con-
trolled trial. Psychol Med 49:655–663. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​
S0033​29171​80013​56
	46.	 Moher D, Shamseer L, Clarke M, Ghersi D, Liberati A, Petticrew 
M, Shekelle P, Stewart LA, PRISMA-P Group (2015) Preferred 
reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis proto-
cols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement. Syst Rev 4:1. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1186/​2046-​4053-4-1
	47.	 Hooijmans CR, Rovers MM, de Vries RB, Leenaars M, Ritskes-
Hoitinga M, Langendam MW (2014) SYRCLE’s risk of bias tool 
for animal studies. BMC Med Res Methodol 14:43. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1186/​1471-​2288-​14-​43
	48.	 Barbosa PC, Strassman RJ, da Silveira DX, Areco K, Hoy R, 
Pommy J, Thoma R, Bogenschutz M (2016) Psychological and 
neuropsychological assessment of regular hoasca users. Compr 
Psychiatry 71:95–105. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compp​sych.​2016.​
09.​003
	49.	 Barbosa PCR, Tófoli LF, Bogenschutz MP, Hoy R, Berro LF, 
Marinho EAV, Areco KN, Winkelman MJ (2018) Assessment 
of alcohol and tobacco use disorders among religious users of 
ayahuasca. Front Psychiatry 9:136. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fpsyt.​
2018.​00136
	50.	 Berlowitz I, Walt H, Ghasarian C, Mendive F, Martin-Soelch C 
(2019) Short-term treatment effects of a substance use disorder 
therapy involving traditional amazonian medicine. J Psychoactive 
Drugs 51:323–334. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02791​072.​2019.​16079​
56
	51.	 Cata-Preta EG, Serra YA, Moreira-Junior EDC, Reis HS, Kisaki 
ND, Libarino-Santos M, Silva RRR, Barros-Santos T, Santos LC, 
Barbosa PCR, Costa JL, Oliveira-Lima AJ, Berro LF, Marinho 
EAV (2018) Ayahuasca and Its DMT- and β-carbolines—contain-
ing ingredients block the expression of alcohol-induced condi-
tioned place preference in mice: role of the treatment environment. 
Front Pharmacol 9:561. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fphar.​2018.​00561
	52.	 Giovannetti C, Garcia Arce S, Rush B, Mendive F (2020) Pilot 
evaluation of a residential drug addiction treatment combining 
traditional amazonian medicine, ayahuasca and psychotherapy on 


	
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience
1 3
depression and anxiety. J Psychoactive Drugs. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​02791​072.​2020.​17892​47
	53.	 Lawn W, Hallak JE, Crippa JA, Dos Santos R, Porffy L, Barratt 
MJ, Ferris JA, Winstock AR, Morgan CJA (2017) Well-being, 
problematic alcohol consumption and acute subjective drug 
effects in past-year ayahuasca users: a large, international, self-
selecting online survey. Sci Rep 7:15201. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41598-​017-​14700-6
	54.	 Nolli LM, de Oliveira DGR, Alves SS, von Zuben MV, Pic-Taylor 
A, Mortari MR, Caldas ED (2019) Effects of the hallucinogenic 
beverage ayahuasca on voluntary alcohol intake by rats and on 
cFos expression in brain areas relevant to drug addiction. Alcohol 
84:67–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​alcoh​ol.​2019.​10.​005
	55.	 Reis HS, Rodrigues IRS, Anjos-Santos A, Libarino-Santos M, 
Serra YA, Cata-Preta EG, Oliveira-Campos D, Kisaki ND, Bar-
ros-Santos T, Yokoyama TS, Cruz FC, Oliveira-Lima AJ, Bar-
bosa PCR, Berro LF, Marinho EAV (2020) Ayahuasca blocks 
the reinstatement of methylphenidate-induced conditioned place 
preference in mice: behavioral and brain Fos expression evalua-
tions. Psychopharmacology 237:3269–3281. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​s00213-​020-​05609-6
	56.	 Godinho AF, Silva MC, Kawashima JD et al (2017) Ayahuasca 
modifies amphetamine self ingestion and modifies anxiety and 
locomotor activity in adolescent rats. Electron J Biol 13:2
	57.	 Bouso JC, Fábregas JM, Antonijoan RM, Rodríguez-Fornells A, 
Riba J (2013) Acute effects of ayahuasca on neuropsychological 
performance: differences in executive function between experi-
enced and occasional users. Psychopharmacology 230:415–424. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00213-​013-​3167-9
	58.	 Howell LL, Cunningham KA (2015) Serotonin 5-HT2 receptor 
interactions with dopamine function: implications for therapeutics 
in cocaine use disorder. Pharmacol Rev 67:176–197. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1124/​pr.​114.​009514
	59.	 Bouso JC, Dos Santos RG, Alcázar-Córcoles MÁ, Hallak JEC 
(2018) Serotonergic psychedelics and personality: a systematic 
review of contemporary research. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 87:118–
132. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neubi​orev.​2018.​02.​004
	60.	 Alper K, Dong B, Shah R, Sershen H, Vinod KY (2018) LSD 
Administered as a single dose reduces alcohol consumption in 
C57BL/6J mice. Front Pharmacol 9:994. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​
fphar.​2018.​00994
	61.	 Meinhardt MW, Güngör C, Skorodumov I, Mertens LJ, Spanagel 
R (2020) Psilocybin and LSD have no long-lasting effects in an 
animal model of alcohol relapse. Neuropsychopharmacology 
45:1316–1322. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41386-​020-​0694-z
	62.	 Maurel S, De Vry J, Schreiber R (1999) 5-HT receptor ligands 
differentially affect operant oral self-administration of alcohol in 
the rat. Eur J Pharmacol 370:217–223. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​
s0014-​2999(99)​00125-9
	63.	 Vargas-Perez H, Grieder TE, Ting-A-Kee R, Maal-Bared G, 
Chwalek M, van der Kooy D (2017) A single administration of 
the hallucinogen, 4-acetoxy-dimethyltryptamine, prevents the shift 
to a drug-dependent state and the expression of withdrawal aver-
sions in rodents. Eur J Neurosci 45:1410–1417. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1111/​ejn.​13572
	64.	 Oppong-Damoah A, Curry KE, Blough BE, Rice KC, Murnane 
KS (2019) Effects of the synthetic psychedelic 2,5-dimethoxy-
4-iodoamphetamine (DOI) on alcohol consumption and place 
conditioning in male mice. Psychopharmacology 236:3567–3578. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00213-​019-​05328-7
	65.	 Martin DA, Gyawali U, Calu DJ (2020) Effects of 5-HT2A receptor 
stimulation on economic demand for fentanyl after intermittent 
and continuous access self-administration in male rats. Addict 
Biol e12926. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​adb.​12926.
	66.	 Ona G, Kohek M, Massaguer T, Gomariz A, Jiménez DF, Dos 
Santos RG et al (2019) Ayahuasca and public health: health sta-
tus, psychosocial well-being, lifestyle, and coping strategies in 
a large sample of ritual ayahuasca users. J Psychoactive Drugs 
51:135–145
