Send Orders of Reprints at reprints@benthamscience.net 
30 
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, 6, 30-42 
 
 
 
Ayahuasca-Assisted Therapy for Addiction: Results from a Preliminary 
Observational Study in Canada 
Gerald Thomas*,1, Philippe Lucas1, N. Rielle Capler2, Kenneth W. Tupper3 and Gina Martin1 
1Centre for Addictions Research of British Columbia, University of Victoria, Canada 
2Interdisciplinary Graduate Studies Program, University of British Columbia, Canada 
3School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia, Canada 
Abstract: Introduction: This paper reports results from a preliminary observational study of ayahuasca-assisted treatment 
for problematic substance use and stress delivered in a rural First Nations community in British Columbia, Canada. 
Methods: The “Working with Addiction and Stress” retreats combined four days of group counselling with two expert-led 
ayahuasca ceremonies. This study collected pre-treatment and six months follow-up data from 12 participants on several 
psychological and behavioral factors related to problematic substance use, and qualitative data assessing the personal 
experiences of the participants six months after the retreat. 
Findings: Statistically significant (p < 0.05) improvements were demonstrated for scales assessing hopefulness, 
empowerment, mindfulness, and quality of life meaning and outlook subscales. Self-reported alcohol, tobacco and cocaine 
use declined, although cannabis and opiate use did not; reported reductions in problematic cocaine use were statistically 
significant. All study participants reported positive and lasting changes from participating in the retreats. 
Conclusions: This form of ayahuasca-assisted therapy appears to be associated with statistically significant improvements 
in several factors related to problematic substance use among a rural aboriginal population. These findings suggest 
participants may have experienced positive psychological and behavioral changes in response to this therapeutic approach, 
and that more rigorous research of ayahuasca-assisted therapy for problematic substance use is warranted. 
Keywords: addiction, ayahuasca, cocaine, substance dependence, substance use, harm reduction. 
BACKGROUND 
 
Ayahuasca is a psychotropic brew prepared from the 
Amazonian vine Banisteriopsis caapi and leaves of the bush 
Psychotria viridis. These plants contain, respectively, 
harmala alkaloids and dimethyltryptamine (DMT), which 
when ingested in combination orally induce several hours of 
a dream-like altered state of consciousness characterized by 
intense visual, auditory, ideational and emotional effects [1, 
2]. The presumed biochemical mechanism of action for 
ayahuasca brews includes presence of beta-carboline 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (harmala alkaloids) coupled 
with dimethyltryptamine, a compound that acts on specific 
serotonin receptors, particularly 5-HT2A receptors [3, 4]. 
 
Ayahuasca has traditionally been drunk in ritual contexts 
by Amazonian indigenous and mestizo peoples for a variety 
of divinatory, magical, spiritual, aesthetic and other cultural 
purposes, including as a diagnostic aid and herbal remedy in 
folk healing practices [5]. In the late 20th and early 21st 
centuries, ayahuasca drinking became a transnational 
phenomenon through increased tourism to the Amazon, 
ceremonies regularly conducted by itinerant ayahuasqueros  
(i.e., individuals trained to administer ayahuasca within an 
Amazonian folk healing ritual context) in the global North, 
 
 
*Address correspondence to this author at the Centre for Addictions 
Research of British Columbia, Canada; Tel: 250-494-8188;  
Fax: 250-494-8255; E-mail: gthomas@okanaganresearch.com 
and a few Brazilian ayahuasca religions establishing active 
spiritual communities in countries around the world [6, 7]. 
The transnational expansion of ayahuasca has been 
accompanied by growing scientific interest in the brew’s 
potential therapeutic or salutogenic value. Preliminary 
research has shown ayahuasca has promise for alleviating 
some mental disorders and for providing other long-term 
health and social benefits among regular drinkers of the brew 
in ritualized and religious community contexts [4, 8-11]. 
 
Importantly, the ritual use of ayahuasca does not 
typically produce health or psychosocial problems such as 
addiction [12-14]. Rather, ceremonial ayahuasca drinking 
has been correlated with lower amounts or severities of 
substance dependence. For example, Grob et al. [9] found 
that among a randomly selected group of União do Vegetal 
(or UDV, a Brazilian ayahuasca church) members, a 
majority reported a prior history of moderate to severe 
problems with alcohol or other drugs, but all had stopped 
using substances other than ayahuasca (including tobacco) 
after joining the church and attributed their improved health 
behaviors to ayahuasca drinking. The UDV subjects also 
reported less excitability and impulsivity, and more 
confidence and optimism compared with matched-control 
community members who did not use ayahuasca [9]. 
Fábregas et al. [13] examined addiction severity among 56 
people belonging to two different Brazilian ayahuasca 
churches (UDV and Santo Daime), and found higher lifetime 
illicit drug use but lower past-month use of alcohol and no  
 
1874-4745/13 $58.00+.00 
© 2013 Bentham Science Publishers 


Ayahuasca-Assisted Therapy for Addiction 
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1     31 
use of psychoactive drugs other than ayahuasca and cannabis 
in the last 30 days, compared with matched controls from the 
community. In interviews with 32 members of a U.S.-based 
chapter of the Santo Daime church, Halpern et al. [10] found 
that, of 24 who reported past substance abuse or dependence, 
all but two were in sustained remission and all five with 
prior alcohol dependence attributed their recovery to 
participation in the church’s rituals. However, all these 
studies involve subjects who are regular and committed 
members of religious communities, so it remains unclear 
whether fewer reported substance use problems can be 
attributed to the ayahuasca drinking rather than being a 
church member. 
 
The use of ayahuasca as a remedy to help overcome drug 
addictions is a fundamental aspect of treatment programs at 
Takiwasi, a therapeutic community based in Tarapoto, Peru 
[15]. The Takiwasi approach incorporates various aspects of 
traditional Amazonian folk medicine (including the use of 
various medicinal jungle plants, in addition to ayahuasca), 
communitarian residence and psychotherapy. Similarly, in 
the 
state 
of 
Amazonas, 
Brazil, 
the 
Instituto 
de 
Etnopsicología Amazónica Aplicada (or IDEAA) runs a 
treatment program that combines the ritual use of ayahuasca 
with complementary psycho-social rehabilitation methods 
[16]. Although these programs claim improved health 
outcomes for patients who complete them, neither has been 
evaluated with sufficient scientific rigor to provide definitive 
evidence of the success of their approaches. Nevertheless, 
evidence from members of Brazilian ayahuasca churches, as 
well as claims of treatment success from Takiwasi and 
IDEAA, has led researchers to speculate on possible 
neurochemical, psychological or transcendent mechanisms 
of ayahuasca’s purported therapeutic action [3, 4, 17, 18]. 
 
In Canada, First Nations and Aboriginal peoples have 
been disproportionately affected by illnesses and social 
problems that are the legacies of colonialism and consequent 
territorial and cultural dislocation [19], including substance 
dependence 
(although 
considerable 
variation 
in 
epidemiology of addiction exists across this heterogeneous 
sub-population) [20]. However, current approaches to 
treating addictions—especially to alcohol and cocaine—
continue to be of limited success [21], despite decades of 
research. Dr. Gabor Maté, a Canadian physician specialized 
in addictions medicine and experienced in working with 
Aboriginal people [22], became interested in the potential 
value of ayahuasca as an adjunct to group therapy in 2009. 
He began conducting occasional multi-day “Working with 
Addiction 
and 
Stress” 
retreats 
in 
partnership 
with 
ayahuasqueros from Peru and British Columbia (the retreat 
team), reporting positive outcomes for participants from the 
general Canadian population with a variety of psychological 
health conditions and illness severities. The retreat team 
refined the structure, pacing and other elements of their 
approach over the course of several retreats conducted with 
mostly non-aboriginal Canadian participants in 2009 and 
2010. This allowed the retreat team to establish procedures 
for enhancing interpersonal rapport and creating a coherent 
therapeutic context prior to the sessions conducted with the 
First Nations participants observed in this study. 
 
 
 
The retreat team’s work with ayahuasca came to the 
attention of a rural aboriginal First Nations band in 
southwestern British Columbia, which invited the team to 
conduct retreats for community members with substance 
dependence or other habitual behavioral problems, such as 
problem gambling. The band’s health office was interested 
in exploring whether a traditional indigenous practice from 
South America might help address some of the past trauma 
and consequent health issues that its community members 
were experiencing and that Western medical and legal 
approaches have not been reliably effective at curtailing. 
 
Following the decision to provide this treatment to 
members of the community, the band’s health office offered 
the authors of this article (the research team) an opportunity 
to conduct an observational study of the retreats in order to 
more systematically document and assess the effects of the 
treatment. Funding for the study was secured through 
philanthropic donations to the Multidisciplinary Association 
of Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) and through an anonymous 
donor. In February 2011, members of the research and retreat 
teams met with the band Council and band Elders to discuss 
the retreats and obtained their consent for the study. At the 
request of the band leadership, the band’s health office 
agreed to closely monitor participants for any adverse 
psychological or other reactions following the retreats. 
Subsequently, two retreats were conducted, one in June 2011 
and the other in September 2011. 
PURPOSE 
 
The objective of this research was to assess the impact 
that this form of ayahuasca-assisted group therapy may have 
on several measures of mental and behavioral health related 
to addiction. The primary outcomes of interest relate to the 
ability of participants to consciously and consistently make 
choices that promote long-term psychological, emotional, 
and physical well-being rather than acting compulsively on 
immediate urges based on conscious or unconscious 
emotional needs and/or unhealthy psychological patterning 
(i.e., addiction) [22]. We posited that this novel form of 
therapy could enhance the ability of participants to make 
conscious healthy choices and resist unhealthy urges by 
eliciting improvements in several attributes related to 
problematic substance use [21]. 
 
Specifically, we collected data to assess the following 
propositions: 
• 
that participation in the ayahuasca ceremonies in the 
context of the “Working with Addiction and Stress” 
retreats would be associated with improvements in 
mindfulness, 
emotional 
regulation, 
personal 
empowerment, hopefulness and quality of life in 
study participants; and, 
• 
that participation in the retreats would be associated 
with reductions in problematic substance use. 
• 
Semi-structured interviews conducted six months 
after the retreats provided additional qualitative data 
from participants’ reflections on the outcomes of their 
experiences. 
 


32     Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1 
Thomas et al. 
METHODS 
Observational Study Procedures 
 
Ethics review and approval was provided by the 
Institutional Review Board Services (IRBS), an independent 
research ethics review board. The band’s health office 
notified the community of the retreats and recruited 
potentially eligible participants. Twelve participants were 
recruited for the first retreat in June 2011 with six new 
participants recruited for the September retreat; all were 
members of the same coastal First Nations band and most 
were residents of the community. Approximately two weeks 
prior to each retreat, a member of the research team 
contacted registered participants and asked if they would be 
willing to participate in the research study. After expressing 
interest, all potential participants were informally screened 
for inclusion criteria (voluntary attendance and the ability to 
communicate in English), and exclusion criteria (under age 
18; have drunk ayahuasca in the past; taking selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor or monoamine oxidase inhibitor 
medications; currently experiencing psychosis or have 
experienced a psychotic break in the recent past). The latter 
two exclusion criteria pertained not to the research 
methodology per se, but to safety precautions relating to 
potential 
medical 
contraindications 
from 
the 
pharmacokinetics of ayahuasca, and so had already been 
initially screened by the retreat team. 
 
Those who met the criteria for participation (n = 18) were 
invited to attend a group orientation session at the band’s 
health office several hours before the start of the retreat. At 
the group orientation, inclusion/exclusion criteria were 
formally verified, written consent (after further explaining 
purpose, procedures and potential risks/benefits of the 
research) was obtained, and initial self-administered surveys 
were conducted to collect baseline data on a number of 
psychological and behavioral factors related to problematic 
substance use. The particular psychometric instruments used 
in this study—the Difficulty in Emotion Regulation Scale 
(DERS), the Philadelphia Mindfulness Scale (PHLMS), the 
Empowerment Scale (ES), the Hope Scale (HS), the McGill 
Quality of Life survey (MQL), and the 4 Week Substance 
Use Scale (4WSUS)—all measure aspects of psychological 
health that relate in some way to problematic substance use; 
more explicit rationales for their inclusion are discussed in 
detail below. 
 
Immediately following the end of the retreats, the State of 
Consciousness Questionnaire (SOCQ) was administered to 
participants to assess the nature and intensity of their 
ayahuasca experiences. Two weeks after the completion of 
the retreat, the six baseline instruments were re-administered 
(for the first follow-up at two weeks, the 4WSUS was 
modified to assess substance use during the previous 14 
days). Participants were subsequently contacted again four 
weeks following the retreats, and monthly thereafter for five 
months, for further data collection using the same six 
measures. Additionally, at the urging of several study 
participants, the research team added a short semi-structured 
interview, subsequent to amended ethics approval, as part of 
the final follow-up session to collect qualitative data about 
participant experiences and impressions during and after the 
retreats (Table 1). 
 
A total of seven post-retreat follow-up assessments were 
conducted, most in person in a group setting at the band’s 
health office. In cases where the participant was not living in 
the community or otherwise unable to attend the in-person 
follow-up session, follow-ups were conducted by telephone, 
and occasionally the instruments were completed by the 
participant on their own time and returned to the research 
team. A $20 gift certificate to a grocery store was offered to 
every participant for each follow-up session, and meals were 
provided at in-person sessions. 
Observational Study Instruments and Rationales for 
their Use 
 
Difficulty in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS) is a 
validated 36-item questionnaire designed to assess the 
degree to which subjects are able to engage in goal directed 
behavior and refrain from impulsive behavior when 
confronted with negative emotion and that has acceptable 
test/retest reliability; therefore, it is suitable for use in 
evaluations of substance dependence treatment [23]. 
 
Rationale: Desires to regulate both positive and negative 
emotional states have long been recognized as important 
motivating factors for substance use [24]. More recently, 
research has illuminated details about the process of 
emotional regulation and in particular the role of emotional 
dysregulation in various forms of psychopathology, 
including substance dependence [25, 26]. In recent decades, 
evidence-based approaches that focus on improving emotion 
regulation have emerged as forms of treatment for substance 
dependence. For example, Dialectic Behavior Therapy 
(DBT) is a treatment modality that has been shown to reduce 
problematic substance use in some clients by teaching them 
basic skills related to the healthy regulation of emotions [27]. 
Also in recent years, scholars have documented that reduced 
emotional intelligence, a concept developed to assess various 
aspects of emotional functioning, is associated with more 
intensive tobacco smoking, alcohol consumption and illicit 
drug use [28]. As is the case with most of the factors 
assessed in this study, healthy emotion regulation is viewed 
as a protective factor while emotion dysregulation (e.g., 
chronic and automatic self-distraction when experiencing 
negative emotions such as fear) is considered a risk factor for 
problematic substance use. 
 
Philadelphia Mindfulness Scale (PHLMS) is a 20-item 
validated instrument that assesses the two components of 
mindfulness posited to have salutary effects on substance 
dependence (awareness of the present moment and 
acceptance) and that has been used with various clinical and 
non-clinical subjects [29]. 
 
Rationale: Long-term substance use has been shown to 
negatively affect certain psychological and behavioral 
factors required for healthy functioning, including: attention 
and inhibitory control, the salience of and response to reward 
stimuli, and the ability to maintain perspective in response to 
strong emotional states [30]. Mindfulness training, with its 
focus on assisting substance users to be fully aware of the 
present moment and to cultivate acceptance of their 
emotions, can address the affective deficiencies sometimes 
associated with problematic substance use. A review of 51 
published studies showed that mindfulness practice can 


Ayahuasca-Assisted Therapy for Addiction 
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1     33 
influence the brain, the autonomic nervous system, stress 
hormones, the immune system, and health behaviors 
including problematic substance use [31]. A more recent 
review of five controlled studies found that mindfulness 
training improved outcomes for substance dependent clients 
over control conditions by allowing them to: 1) accept 
unusual physical sensations that might be confused with 
withdrawal symptoms, 2) decentre from a strong urge and 
not act impulsively, 3) reduce the susceptibility to act in 
response to a drug cue, 4) maintain perspective in response 
to strong emotional states and decrease dysfunctional 
avoidance, and 5) increase the saliency of natural reinforcers 
[32]. Several empirically validated forms of treatment for 
substance dependence and mood disorders are based on or 
incorporate mindfulness training, including: mindfulness-
based relapse prevention [33], mindfulness-based stress 
reduction [34], Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) 
[35], Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT) [36], and 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) [37]. Further, since 
aspects of the group counselling provided by the retreat team 
during the workshops are specifically directed at enhancing 
present-moment awareness and acceptance of participants, 
this measure was included to assess the mindfulness of 
participants before and after the intervention to assess 
improvement and see if it was correlated with reductions in 
substance use. 
 
Empowerment Scale (ES) is a 28-item questionnaire 
assessing psychological and social empowerment over five 
dimensions: self-efficacy/self-esteem, power/powerlessness, 
affecting change, optimism/control over future, righteous 
anger, and group/community action. The scale was 
constructed through a process involving consumers of 
mental health services and demonstrates acceptable internal 
consistency [38]. Several of the scale’s sub-factors (i.e., self-
efficacy/self-esteem, 
power/powerlessness, 
community 
activism, and optimism-control over the future) have been 
shown to be associated with patterns of problematic 
substance use. 
 
Rationale: Psychological and social empowerment have 
been identified as effective components of prevention and 
health promotion interventions due to their ability to: 1) 
increase a sense of personal control, and 2) enhance beliefs 
in the ability of people to act to change their own lives [39]. 
The issue of empowerment appears to be particularly 
important for those who have experienced trauma [40]. 
Following this logic, elements directed at enhancing 
empowerment have been incorporated into substance use 
prevention 
and 
addiction 
treatment 
programs 
for 
marginalized youth (including American Indian youths), 
women who have experienced trauma, and marginalized 
ethnic minorities [41-44]. We included empowerment as an 
independent factor in this observational study of participants 
drawn from a First Nation band, due specifically to the 
documented inter-generational trauma that this population 
has experienced over the last several generations and the 
documented relationship between trauma, powerlessness and 
problematic substance use [45]. 
 
Hope Scale (HS) is a 12-item psychometric questionnaire 
providing a behaviorally relevant measure of hopefulness by 
assessing the presence of successful agency (goal-directed 
determination) and pathways (planning of ways to meet 
goals) in study participants. 
 
Rationale: Although there is some debate as to whether 
depression and substance dependence are directly causal to 
one another or whether they simply share common 
etiological 
roots, 
their 
co-occurrence 
is 
widely 
acknowledged. 
Specifically, 
epidemiological 
research 
consistently verifies that depression is relatively common 
among substance dependent individuals, and problematic 
substance use is relatively common among those with a 
primary diagnosis of depression [46]. The association 
between hopelessness and substance dependence is so 
fundamental, in fact, that in their work to identify basic 
personality traits associated with increased risk of substance 
use problems, researchers from Canada and elsewhere 
identify “hopelessness” as one of four main at-risk 
personality traits [the others are anxiety sensitivity, sensation 
seeking and impulsivity) [47]. At the same time, 
hopefulness—here defined in terms of agency (goal-directed 
determination) and pathways (planning of ways to meet 
goals)—has been shown to be a protective factor against 
psychological problems such as depression and behavioral 
problems such as substance dependence, and so was 
included in the study to assess changes in these measures 
stemming from participation in the “Working with Addiction 
and Stress” retreats. 
 
McGill Quality of Life (MQL) survey is a 17-item 
questionnaire that has been validated for use with clinical 
palliative care patients assessing quality of life along four 
Table 1. 
Schedule of Application of Survey Instruments 
 
 
Orientation Meeting  
(Pre Treatment) 
Immediately Following Last  
Session of the Retreat 
Week 2 
Week 4/ Months 2-6  
(Total of 6 Assessments) 
Month 6 
DERS 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
PHLMS 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
MQL 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
ES 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
HS 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
4WSUS 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
SOCQ 
 
X 
 
 
 
Qualitative interview 
 
 
 
 
X 


34     Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1 
Thomas et al. 
subscales: physical symptoms, psychological symptoms, 
outlook on life, and meaningful existence. 
 
Rationale: There is theory and some evidence that quality 
of life and wellness can influence substance dependence 
patterns, with higher life quality posited to be a protective 
and rehabilitative factor and lower quality of life posited to 
be a risk factor, especially for relapse [48, 49]. In this study, 
quality of life is interpreted as both an independent factor 
potentially influencing patterns of substance use, and a 
dependent variable that we predict would increase when the 
wholly 
independent 
factors 
(emotional 
regulation, 
mindfulness, hopefulness and empowerment) increased. It 
was chosen for this study because it includes existential 
elements related to mattering (i.e., the meaning of life) as 
well as measures of physical and psychological well-being 
[50]. The existential aspect is important for this study given 
the reported effects of ayahuasca on subjective perceptions 
of the meaning and nature of existence [51]. 
 
4 Week Substance Use Scale (4WSUS) is an 11-item 
questionnaire based on the World Health Organization’s 
Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening 
Test (ASSIST) questionnaire that screens for the hazardous 
use of various legal and illegal psychoactive substances, 
including prescription drugs. 
 
Rationale: The ASSIST questionnaire is a valid and 
reliable screen for problematic substance use [52], which has 
been employed in prevalence studies in several countries, 
including Canada [53, 54]. The 4WSUS is the main 
behavioral outcome variable for this study. We modified the 
4WSUS slightly to assess use over the past two weeks rather 
than the past four weeks for the first follow-up so that 
shorter-term changes in substance use patterns could be 
identified. Like the ASSIST, the 4WSUS measures 
problematic substance use by assessing the levels and 
patterns of use of various substances (i.e., alcohol, tobacco, 
cannabis, opiates, depressants, hallucinogens, inhalants, and 
prescription drugs) and several related elements, including 
the frequency and intensity of cravings for use and also 
harms resulting from the subject’s substance use. In our 
findings, we report on substance use two ways: 1) did the 
participant report using the substance at baseline and at six 
months (yes/no)?; and 2) did the 4WSUS scores for each 
participant change significantly from baseline to month six? 
 
In addition to collecting data using the instruments 
described above, immediately following completion of the 
retreats, the States of Consciousness Questionnaire (SOCQ), 
which assesses the nature and intensity of experiences during 
the two ayahuasca ceremonies, was administered to all 
participants in a group setting. Data from the SOCQ is not 
included in this analysis, but will be reported on in future 
papers. 
 
In summary, we selected the various psychological and 
behavioral instruments listed above based on a holistic 
interpretation of the bio-psycho-social-spiritual model of 
human behavior, trauma and substance dependence. Our 
model identifies four inter-related factors that have been 
shown to affect patterns of substance use (i.e., emotional 
regulation, mindfulness, empowerment and hopefulness), 
one factor that is both a potential influencer of patterns of 
substance use and an outcome measure that explicitly 
includes existential elements (McGill Quality of Life), and 
the main outcome measure that assesses problematic 
substance use (4WSUS). 
 
After hearing from a number of participants that the 
questionnaires and surveys were not capturing the totality of 
their experience, the study team sought and was granted 
ethics approval to add a short semi-structured interview as 
part of the seventh follow-up session to collect qualitative 
data about their experience of the retreat in their own words. 
The interviews focused on three questions: 
1. 
Did the stress and addiction retreat have any impact 
on your life (Y or N)? 
2. 
On a scale of one to ten, with one being extremely 
negative and ten being extremely positive, how would 
you rank the effects of the stress and addiction retreat 
on your life? 
3. 
Please describe how this experience a) impacted your 
connection to yourself, others, and nature or spirit; b) 
affected your substance use; c) differed from past 
drug treatments or therapies. 
 
The questions about connection were asked to capture the 
participant’s experiences that were not addressed in the 
survey instruments we had pre-selected, but arose in 
discussions during the retreats and follow-ups. 
Statistical Analysis Procedures 
 
Scale scores were calculated for the following measures: 
mindfulness, 
empowerment, 
emotional 
regulation, 
hopefulness and quality of life (which included five sub-
scales: overall quality of life [one question], physical 
symptoms, psychological symptoms, outlook, and meaning). 
Missing values were imputed by using the mean of the valid 
responses when fewer than 20% of the questions were 
missing for each scale of a participant. Imputations were 
necessary for less than 5% of questions overall, so should 
not substantially affect the statistical validity of the analysis. 
 
The Four Week Substance Use Survey (4WSUS) was 
used to assess problematic substance use. Scores were based 
on three questions assessing frequency and patterns of 
substance use, desire to use (cravings), and harm from use. 
Due to variation in the timing of the follow ups, the time 
frame assessed by the substance use survey also varied: at 
baseline participants were asked about their substance use in 
the past four weeks, in the first follow up they were asked 
about substance use in the past two weeks, and for the rest of 
the six post-treatment follow ups the retrospective time 
frame was again extended to four weeks. The 4WSUS 
scoring ranges from 0-39 (with the exception of tobacco, 
which ranges from 0-31), with higher values indicating more 
problematic use. As the 4WSUS questions did not all use the 
same scale for each item, no imputations were done. 
 
Since the same participants were measured in each phase 
of the study, a one-group repeated-measures ANOVA was 
conducted on each of the scale measures—emotional 
regulation, mindfulness, empowerment, hope and all quality 
of life subscales—to statistically assess any changes over 
time. In order to retain the highest number of completed 
cases in the analyses, the means of the second and third, the 


Ayahuasca-Assisted Therapy for Addiction 
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1     35 
fourth and fifth, and the sixth and seventh survey scale 
scores were aggregated to deal with missing follow-up 
surveys; this provided five temporal data points in total for 
each subject and each scale. The baseline and first follow-up 
were not aggregated, as the majority of participants 
completed these. When using a repeated-measures design, an 
important assumption is that of sphericity (the variances 
between all possible pairs are equal). Sphericity was tested 
using Mauchly’s W; if Mauchly’s W < 0.05, then we 
concluded that significant differences exist between the 
variance of differences, and sphericity was not met. If 
sphericity was not met, corrections were applied to the 
degrees of freedom using one or a set of correction methods 
[55]. Further, if a measure showed significant differences 
between time points, a trend analysis was conducted. Finally, 
as four participants received the intervention twice (n=4), a 
second repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted, which 
included an interaction term between having done the study 
twice and the scale scores over time. 
 
Additionally, 
the 
semi-structured 
interviews 
were 
recorded and transcribed for subsequent analysis. Answers to 
the first two questions were quantified, and content analysis 
was conducted on answers to the third question to identify 
information useful for interpreting the quantitative findings. 
THE INTERVENTION: “WORKING WITH ADDICT-
ION AND STRESS” RETREATS 
 
The retreats involved participants assembling for four 
consecutive days and three nights in the band’s longhouse 
(traditional community ceremonial space), which had been 
blessed by band elders in preparation for these special 
events. The longhouse was prepared by spreading cedar 
boughs over the large dirt floor, similar to preparations for 
the band’s traditional Coast Salish dance rituals [56], which 
take place over the winter months. 
 
Participants resided at the longhouse for the full length of 
the retreat, with meals prepared on-site by a local caterer and 
in accordance with the traditional strict dietary requirements 
of Shipibo (Peruvian Amazonian indigenous) ayahuasca 
ceremonies. This included restrictions on meat, sugar, 
alcohol, salt and other strong seasonings. Members of the 
research team were invited to be present as observers 
throughout the retreat, including the ayahuasca ceremonies. 
 
The retreats incorporated two ayahuasca ceremonies, one 
on the second and one on the third evening, led by a Shipibo 
master ayahuasquero and three (non-aboriginal) Canadian 
apprentice ayahuasqueros. While not overtly religious 
events, ayahuasca ceremonies in the Peruvian indigenous 
tradition typically have the solemnity of a serious spiritual 
practice [57]. The retreat team provided the ayahuasca brew, 
which had been ritually prepared according to Shipibo 
customs. At various intervals during the four days, the retreat 
team led group talk therapy sessions to elicit personal 
reflection and insights about traumatic life experiences and 
consequent 
emotional 
and 
psychological 
responses, 
including compulsions such as dependent substance use. 
 
 
Day 1 of the Retreat 
 
Participants arrived in the mid-afternoon and laid down 
mattresses and bedding in a circle. After dinner, the retreat 
team arrived and was greeted by a local First Nations spirit-
keeper with songs of welcome, strength and courage for the 
participants, healers and the research team. A round of 
introductions then took place, after which the retreat team 
explained the process that was about to take place over the 
next few days. 
Day 2, Morning/Afternoon 
 
The retreat team arrived at about 10 a.m. After a silent 
meditation, the retreat team led a discussion to elicit 
reflection by participants about their addictions or 
compulsive behaviours—loosely resembling Prochaska et 
al.’s stages of changes and decisional balance for problem 
behaviors 
[58]—which 
provided 
an 
opportunity 
for 
individuals to re-conceptualize their own addictions beyond 
personal weaknesses or shortcomings. 
 
Beyond the self-introspection that was encouraged the 
first morning, the group setting created a sense of shared 
empathy and understanding, and a safe space for 
forthcoming exploration into the multi-generational trauma 
endured by retreat participants. The afternoon continued with 
further psychosomatic (e.g. breathing, meditation) exercises 
and group sharing/counseling. 
Day 2, Evening 
 
After dinner and a sweat lodge ceremony, all participants 
gathered back in the longhouse to share their intentions for 
the ayahuasca ceremony. At approximately 9: 00 p.m. 
participants sat or lay on their beds in the large darkened 
room, and were individually invited to sit in front of the 
master ayahuasquero to drink a small glass (50-100 
millilitres) of ayahuasca, after which all light sources were 
shut off. After about an hour of silence, the ayahuasqueros 
began to chant icaros (traditional chants believed to assist in 
healing), which continued for the duration of the experience 
(4-5 hours). During the ceremony, some participants purged 
(i.e., vomited, a common and not necessarily adverse effect 
of ayahuasca) and each participant was invited to sit in front 
of the ayahuasquero to receive a soplada, a chant (sung in 
Shipibo, Quechua or Spanish) selected for that individual 
and accompanied by blowing of perfume or mapacho 
(Amazonian tobacco) smoke on them. At approximately  
3:00 a.m., the ceremony ended, the retreat team left for the 
night, while participants slept in the longhouse under the 
supervision of the observers from the band’s health office. 
Day 3 
 
The next morning began with unstructured dialogue 
about the previous evening’s experience among participants 
during breakfast, followed by a more formal debrief with the 
retreat team. The second ayahuasca ceremony took place on 
the third night with all participants present, although  
 
 


36     Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1 
Thomas et al. 
(over the course of the two different retreats) one of the 
twelve participants chose not to drink ayahuasca on the 
second night. 
Day 4 
 
There was a final debrief on the morning of the last day 
of the retreat, and the first retreat ended with the participants 
presenting the retreat team leaders with gifts. All participants 
left the site of the retreat before noon, with the band’s health 
office agreeing to monitor them for any potential adverse 
after-effects. 
RESULTS – PSYCHOSOCIAL AND SUBSTANCE USE 
MEASURES 
 
The results we report are from the twelve participants 
who attended at least one retreat and had no missing data 
when all imputations were done and when we combined the 
second and third, fourth and fifth, and sixth and seventh. Of 
the 18 participants originally recruited, two ultimately chose 
not to participate in the retreats, one left following the first 
night due to a pre-existing health condition, and three others 
completed the retreats and some of the follow-ups but had 
missing 
data. 
Additionally, 
while 
some 
participants 
suggested they had some initial difficulty in incorporating 
the retreat experience into their day-to-day lives, there were 
no serious adverse health or psychological consequences 
reported to either the research team or the band’s health 
office after the retreats. For the twelve who were retained in 
the study, mindfulness, empowerment, hopefulness, quality of 
life-meaning, and quality of life-outlook showed statistically 
significant 
improvements 
over 
time 
(p<.05). 
While 
emotional regulation, quality of life-overall and quality of 
life-psychological all showed improvements, these changes 
were not statistically significant (Table 2). 
 
Quality of life-meaning showed a significant linear 
component and also a quadratic component: it increased 
from baseline at the first follow up and then decreased before 
increasing again consistently after the third data point (Fig. 
1), whereas mindfulness and hope had a significant linear 
component indicating continued increase over time (Figs. 2, 
3). As such, we suggest that improvement in these psycho-
social and behavioral measures immediately following the 
retreats and over the 6 month follow-up period could be 
interpreted as contributing to alleviation of problematic 
substance use following ayahuasca-assisted therapy for 
problematic substance use. 
 
Figs. (1-3) show the changes in average scale scores for 
quality of life-meaning, mindfulness, and hopefulness over 
the study period. The reliability of the psychosocial scales at 
baseline ranged from Cronbach’s alpha = 0.408 to 0.929, 
with both hope and mindfulness having alphas lower than 
0.700, which is typically used as the cut-off to determine 
good internal validity for a psychometric measure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (1). Average quality of life-meaning score. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (2). Average mindfulness score. 
 
Table 3 shows the proportion of participants (among 
those who completed the seventh follow-up) who reported 
using each type of substance in the four weeks prior to 
baseline and the four weeks prior to the seventh (six-month) 
follow-up. As with the psychosocial scales, the follow-ups 
were aggregated so that the means of follow-up two and 
Table 2. 
Results of Repeated-Measures ANOVA – Psychosocial Scales 
 
Scale 
F Score 
P Value 
n 
Cronbach’s Alpha 
hope 
3.14 
.023 
12 
0.456 
empowerment 
5.07 
.002 
10 
0.702 
mindfulness  
2.76 
.041 
11 
0.408 
emotional regulation 
1.96 
.124 
9 
0.929 
quality of life- overall 
2.05 
.105 
11 
n/a 
quality of life- psy 
2.52 
.055 
12 
0.736 
quality of life- meaning 
4.36 
.005 
12 
0.879 
quality of life- outlook 
4.43 
.004 
12 
0.925 
*Sphericity is assumed as Mauchly’s W is > .05 for all measures. 
aLower scores equal greater emotional regulation. 


Ayahuasca-Assisted Therapy for Addiction 
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1     37 
three, four and five as well as six and seven were used. 
These data indicate that alcohol, tobacco and cocaine were 
used by fewer participants in the four weeks preceding the 
seventh and final follow up than in the four weeks before 
attending the retreat (baseline). The past-month use of 
cannabis and opiates showed no change in use during the 
study. One participant reported using hallucinogens during 
the last 4 weeks of the study, resulting in an increase in the 
proportion of users from baseline of 9.1%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (3). Average hope score. 
Table 3. 
Proportion of those who Responded that they had 
Used a Substance at Baseline and the Last Follow-
Up, of those who Completed the 7th Follow-Up 
 
Proportion that had  
Used at Baseline (%) 
Proportion that had  
Used at Last Follow-Up (%) 
Substance 
n = 11 
n = 11 
Tobacco 
81.8 
63.6 
Alcohol* 
50 
20 
Cannabis 
45.5 
45.5 
Cocaine* 
60 
0 
Amphetamine 
0 
0 
Inhalants 
0 
0 
Sedatives 
18.2 
18.2 
Hallucinogens 
0 
9.1 
Opioids 
9.1 
9.1 
* n= 10; 1 participant did not answer the question at one phase. 
 
 
Fig. (4) shows changes in the 4WSUS scores measuring 
changes in participants’ levels and patterns of use, cravings 
and substance-related harm for the substances used by at 
least 40% of the participants at baseline—tobacco, alcohol, 
cannabis and cocaine. 4WSUS scores decreased for all 
substances except cannabis, with statistically significant 
reductions documented for problematic cocaine use over the 
study period. 
RESULTS – SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEWS 
 
Interviews were conducted with eleven study participants 
at the seventh data collection session to collect additional 
qualitative information about the effects they felt the retreats 
had on their lives. All eleven participants who completed the 
semi-structured interviews said that the retreats had some  
 
impact on their lives, and when asked to rank the experience 
of the retreats on a scale from 1 (extremely negative) to 10 
(extremely positive), the mean was 7.95 (n = 11), with eight 
participants ranking it as 8 or higher, and no one ranking it 
below 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (4). Changes in 4WSUS scores for tobacco, alcohol, cannabis 
and cocaine. 
 
The following quotations are excerpts from interviews 
with participants responding to questions about a) the impact 
of the retreats on their relationship with themselves, others, 
and with nature or spirit; b) how the retreats affected their 
use of substances; and c) how the retreat experience differed 
from other types of treatments or therapies they had 
encountered. 
Connection with Self 
 
S1 (male, age 30): “With my last experience with the 
ayahuasca, I really faced myself. Like, my fear, my anger. 
Which really, I think is a big part of my addictions. Like, 
running away from myself pretty much. And I think I 
overcame that in the ceremonies. That was a pretty big deal 
for me . . . I wish I was introduced to it [ayahuasca] like 
twenty years ago. It could have saved me a lot of time and 
trouble.” 
 
S2 (female, age 41): “[The retreat] affected my life in 
giving me another chance at life rather than being stuck in 
my addiction and just living for my addiction. . . . I realize 
that I deserve a better life and I love myself. And I have 
more respect for myself. And the honesty that, just being 
honest with myself and others, had a major impact . . . 
[Ayahuasca] really opened my eyes. It was like I was shut 
down [before drinking ayahuasca]. My mind and my eyes 
were shut down to everything. After the retreat I felt like a 
brick was lifted off of my shoulders and I was just feeling 
free.” 
Connection with Others 
 
S3 (male, age 56): “It’s opened up where I felt I had a 
door closed to allow and to be, to allow my close family 
members inside me. It’s a . . . I can’t describe it right now 
but, I see the changes in my grandkids’ response towards me, 
and they are always like, want to be around, around me and 
my wife so, it’s lots to tell you there. Safety I guess, from 
our change.” 
 
S5 (male, age 51): “With my relationships, I think it’s 
coming a lot better with my family now. Because I wasn’t 
really seeing my family. I just wanted to stick by myself, but 
nowadays I’m spending more time with my family now.” 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
baseline
follow-up 1
follow-up 2/3
follow-up 4/5
follow-up 6/7
4WSUS score
Tobacco
Alcohol
Cannabis
Cocaine


38     Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1 
Thomas et al. 
Connection with Spirit and Nature 
 
S6 (female, age 19): “A week or two after [the retreat] I 
was just waking up every morning at like five, six in the 
morning and going outside and . . . I just sat and stared at the 
trees and the wind for like two hours, I would sit outside and 
it was just beautiful. I’ve never noticed it that much ever in 
my life. And after I had the ayahuasca it was just amazing, 
the connection with nature.” 
 
S7 (female, age 49): “I got my spirit back, for one. 
Nature, like it’s saying “wake up and smell the coffee.” Like 
it’s so beautiful outside, and where was all that all this time? 
You know, I was just living [with] a black cloud over me. 
And the black cloud’s been removed basically. Because life 
is a lot nicer than it ever was. You know? I go spirit bathing 
every morning.” 
Substance Use 
 
S2 (female, age 41): “Before the ceremony I was 
struggling with my addiction, crack cocaine, for many years. 
And when I went to this retreat, it more or less helped me 
release the hurt and pain that I was carrying around and 
trying to bury that hurt and pain with drugs and alcohol. Ever 
since this retreat I’ve been clean and sober. So it had a major 
impact on my life in a positive way . . . My family is back in 
my life. My daughter is back at home. And, we are getting 
closer and closer every day as time goes on.” 
 
S3 (male, age 56): “No cravings whatsoever for the crack 
cocaine or drinking, whatsoever. It’s pretty strong that 
Ayahuasca as far as removing that craving, that desire, that 
habit, or however you want to describe it, for me it’s not 
even there.” 
Differed from Past Treatment or Therapies 
 
S1 (male, age 30): “I had no sense of spirituality before 
really, coming clean and sober even while I was going 
through, like AA and NA. They tell you to reach your higher 
power or whatever. I thought that was a bunch of bull. But 
after the retreats I’ve really opened up to spirituality big 
time. I smudge every night before bed. I pray. I, you know, I 
say thanks to whatever is out there, you know?” 
 
S8 (male, age 55): “Other treatments [for my addiction] 
sort of like scraped the surface as they say. This one got 
deep, deep into myself, which I’ve never admitted to or 
confronted I guess you could say in the other treatments. 
And this was just a mind-bending experience, boy! [laughs]. 
I can’t believe what I saw and who I talked to, like my mom 
and my dad and my granddaughter who are in the next world 
there [i.e., have passed away]. And it really, really touched 
me deeply and I think about that every day.” 
 
As these comments from participants illustrate, the semi-
structured interviews proved useful in increasing our 
understanding of how the “Working with Addiction and 
Stress” retreats and the incorporation of ayahuasca 
ceremonies affected the lives of participants in the short and 
medium term, while also highlighting the limitations of 
purely quantitative methods in studying the subjective 
impacts of this kind of therapy. A more comprehensive 
analysis and discussion of the qualitative results of this study 
and the States of Consciousness Questionnaire will be the 
subject of a future publication. 
DISCUSSION 
 
We found that participating in the “Working with 
Addiction and Stress” retreats correlated with improvements 
in several cognitive and behavioral states—including 
enhanced 
mindfulness, 
personal 
empowerment 
and 
hopefulness—which we hypothesized may be associated 
with recovery from problematic substance use. Participating 
in the retreats also correlated with improvements in quality 
of life (meaning and outlook), and subjective feelings of 
connection with self, others, spirit and nature. The results 
also suggest that this form of ayahuasca-assisted group 
therapy may be associated with reductions in substance use, 
particularly reductions in problematic cocaine use. The 
changes in substance use reported by participants by the end 
of the study period—that is, that cocaine, alcohol and 
tobacco use declined, whereas cannabis, sedative and opiate 
use did not—may reflect the fact that in some cases the latter 
substances were medically prescribed. Some participants 
reported being in a methadone maintenance program (which 
was not a criterion for exclusion from the study) and others 
reported using medical cannabis under the recommendation 
of a physician. Of note is the fact that cocaine and alcohol 
were identified as the substances of primary concern by the 
majority of participants. 
 
These findings suggest that this novel form of treatment 
may facilitate positive health changes, including reduced 
problematic cocaine use, in a rural aboriginal population. 
The entheogenic use of ayahuasca may have functional 
effects similar to those of peyote, which is used ceremonially 
by aboriginal members of the Native American Church 
without any evident psychological or cognitive deficits [59], 
and has historically been incorporated into addiction 
treatment interventions for aboriginal populations [60]. Our 
findings are also consistent with scientific evidence on the 
utility of psychedelic substances—such as LSD, mescaline 
and psilocybin—as therapeutic agents for treating addiction 
and catalysts for personal transformation [61-64]. It may be 
that ayahuasca can function to increase the personality trait 
of openness, demonstrated experimentally to be a correlation 
of mystical or spiritual experiences induced by psilocybin (a 
close analog of one of ayahuasca’s psychoactive chemical 
constituents, DMT) [65]. In light of the limited success of 
currently available medical treatments for treating substance 
dependence in aboriginal populations, further research 
efforts, including randomized controlled trials, are necessary 
to determine whether and how ayahuasca might be added to 
available approaches for treating drug or other addictions. 
 
This study of ayahuasca-assisted group therapy has a 
number of limitations. The small-scale observational study 
design was limited to eighteen convenience sample 
participants who self-identified as having an interest in 
participating in the retreats, with 2 who ultimately chose not 
to attend the retreats, one drop-out on the second day of the 
first retreat, and three whom the researchers lost contact with 
during the six-month follow-up period. This limited number, 
along with the absence of any matched controls, makes it 
impossible to assign direct causality to the treatment or to 
determine whether the findings may be generalizable to other 


Ayahuasca-Assisted Therapy for Addiction 
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1     39 
populations. Also, the study was not designed to assess the 
relative effects of the group therapy work, other ancillary 
potentially therapeutic elements (spirit baths, sweat lodges), 
the pharmacological action of the ayahuasca, or the 
psychodynamic context of the retreats combining these 
various elements, and did not track whether participants were 
involved in other forms of treatment during the follow-up 
period. Further, all substance use measures were based on 
self-report, and could not be verified by independent means, 
such as urine or blood toxicology screens. 
 
Additionally, it is possible that the intercultural bridging 
occasioned by the ceremonies may have introduced a 
confounding, 
although 
not 
necessarily 
undesirable, 
salutogenic effect to the retreats. The connection between the 
Shipibo Amazonian and North American indigenous 
peoples, in the context of the former sharing an important 
ceremonial healing practice, may have had positive 
therapeutic effects on its own, independent of the ayahuasca 
drinking. Either way, it is not possible from this study to 
make any claims whether the observed positive effects of 
ayahuasca-assisted therapy may be generalizable to other 
First Nations peoples in Canada, or to other aboriginal 
peoples elsewhere in the world. 
 
Another limitation arises from the pharmacology of 
ayahuasca, a brew made from two plants that contain a 
number of alkaloids whose relative concentrations vary 
according to circadian timing of harvest and preparation [66, 
67]. As there was no scientific chemical analysis of the brew 
drunk during the ceremonies at the retreats, and as 
participants received varying amounts (determined by the 
ayahuasqueros using traditional healing knowledge and 
criteria), it is not possible to know the amounts or relative 
concentrations of the psychoactive components ingested or 
whether any outcomes were dose dependent. Nevertheless, 
as the participants’ qualitative interview reports suggest, the 
effects of the brew were characteristic of ayahuasca 
phenomenology and therefore do not suggest any concerns 
about its composition or potency. It must also be noted that 
one participant opted to drink ayahuasca only once during 
the retreat, however our analysis was unable to account for 
any differences between outcomes for this participant versus 
the rest who drank both nights. 
 
Finally, one unforeseen limitation was that four 
individuals who participated in the first retreat also 
participated in the second; thus, one-third of 12 participants 
participated in two retreats, and two-thirds only one retreat. 
Given the small number of participants, and that the minor 
differences in outcomes of the repeat participants and of 
those who participated in only one retreat were not 
significant, no conclusion can be drawn from our data on the 
potential harms/benefits of additional treatments. Future 
research should include more participants, potentially with 
some doing one treatment and others doing two or more in 
order to determine whether there are harms/benefits to repeat 
treatments. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Our results suggest that this form of ayahuasca-assisted 
therapy for stress and addiction was correlated with 
statistically 
significant 
improvements 
in 
mindfulness, 
empowerment, hopefulness and quality of life-outlook and 
quality of life-meaning. It may also have contributed to 
statistically significant reductions in cocaine use. The 
findings of this research on ayahuasca-assisted treatment for 
addictions, although preliminary, corroborate those of 
previous studies showing salutogenic effects of ceremonial 
ayahuasca drinking. 
 
Given the potential to decrease the personal suffering and 
social costs associated with addiction, further research on 
ayahuasca-assisted 
addictions 
treatment 
is 
warranted. 
Clinical trials with people who have had poor outcomes with 
conventional psychological or pharmacological addiction 
treatments would help determine which adjunct therapeutic 
approaches might produce the best outcomes for particular 
populations, and further our understanding of ayahuasca-
assisted treatments for problematic substance use. 
ADDENDUM – LEGAL STATUS OF AYAHUASCA IN 
CANADA 
 
At the time that the retreats described in this study were 
conducted, Health Canada had provided a recommendation for 
approval “in principle” to exempt certain forms of ceremonial 
ayahuasca use from the Canadian Controlled Drugs and 
Substances Act [68]. The investigation into ayahuasca by Health 
Canada’s Office of Controlled Substances between 2001 and 
2008 found the potential risks to be minimal when the brew is 
used in traditional ceremonial contexts and participants 
carefully screened [69]. Despite this preliminary positive signal 
regarding the low risk potential and thus tolerability of 
ceremonial ayahuasca use, in November 2011 Health Canada 
reprimanded Dr. Maté and threatened him with legal action if he 
continued his work with ayahuasca as an addictions treatment 
[70]. In October 2012, against the 2008 recommendation of 
department staff, the federal Health Minister Leona Aglukkaq 
denied a request for legal exemption for ceremonial ayahuasca 
use. The Minister decreed that the Amazonian brew was an 
illicit preparation of controlled substances, and that tolerance for 
its ceremonial use would not be in the public interest [71]. 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
 
The authors confirm that this article content has no 
conflict of interest. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The authors would like to thank the retreat participants 
who shared their experience with us, the First Nations band 
that made the study possible, Dr. Gabor Maté and his retreat 
team for allowing us to observe their work, the 
Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, Dr. 
Bronner’s Soaps, the Riverstyx Foundation and TIDES 
Canada for providing generous financial support for the 
research, and Scott MacDonald, Ilsa Jerome, Brian Rush and 
the journal’s anonymous reviewers for helpful feedback on 
earlier drafts of this paper. 
APPENDIX 
 
Table 4 shows that cocaine ASSIST scores, which 
combine assessments of frequency of use, desire to use and 
harm from use into a scale designed to assess severity of 


40     Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1 
Thomas et al. 
problematic use, showed significant improvements between 
study follow-ups, while tobacco ASSIST scores improved 
marginally. Examining the tests of with-in subject contrasts 
for the cocaine ASSIST scores we find a significant (p = 
0.003) linear component of cocaine over time. 
Table 4. 
Results of Repeated-Measures ANOVA –ASSIST 
Scores 
 
Scale 
F Score 
P Value 
n 
Tobacco* 
2.54 
.057 
10 
Alcohol** 
2.74 
.091 
10 
Cannabis* 
1.21 
.958 
9 
Cocaine** 
7.96 
.003 
11 
*Sphericity is assumed as Mauchly’s W is > .05. 
**Sphericity is not assumed as Mauchly’s W is < .05; Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment 
is used to test significance; Huyh-Feldt adjustments confirms significance or non-
significance at the .05 level. 
 
 
Table 5 show the results of the analysis that examined the 
between group effects. There was no significant interaction 
between the groups and trend indicating no significant 
difference between the changes over time between those who 
participated in two retreats and those who participated in 
one. Overall quality of life and outlook showed significant 
between group effects with both these measures being lower 
 
Table 5. 
Results of Repeated-Measures MANOVA Showing 
Significance of having Participated in One vs Two 
Retreats – Psychosocial Scales 
 
Scale 
Interaction 
p Value 
Treatment 
 p Value 
Treatment  
Twice  
n 
Treatment  
Once 
 n 
hope 
.201 
.629 
4 
8 
empowerment 
.500 
.072 
4 
6 
mindfulness  
.322 
.939 
3 
8 
emotional  
regulation 
.673 
.769 
3 
6 
Quality of 
 life- overall 
.218 
.035 
4 
7 
Quality of  
life- psy 
.311 
.409 
4 
8 
Quality of  
life- meaning 
.629 
.079 
4 
8 
Quality of  
life- outlook 
.276 
.001 
4 
8 
 
in those who received two treatments. If those that received 
the treatment twice are removed from the analysis, the 
quality of life-overall measure is not significant (F=1.63, 
p=.199, sphericity assumed) and outlook is significant 
(F=3.22, p=.027, sphericity assumed). Due to the small 
number who had the treatment twice, analysis could not be 
conducted on this group alone as the n is too small to test the 
assumption of sphericity. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Shanon B. The antipodes of the mind: Charting the phenomenology 
of the ayahuasca experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 
2002. 
[2] 
Riba J, Rodriguez-Fornells A, Urbano G, et al. Subjective effects 
and tolerability of the South American psychoactive beverage 
Ayahuasca in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology 2001; 154: 
85-95. 
[3] 
Brierley DI, Davidson C. Developments in harmine pharmacology 
– implications for ayahuasca use and drug-dependence treatment. 
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biological Psychiatry 2012; 39(3): 
263-72. 
[4] 
McKenna DJ. Clinical investigations of the therapeutic potential of 
ayahuasca: Rationale and regulatory challenges. Pharmacol 
Therapeut 2004; 102(2): 111-29. 
[5] 
Beyer SV. Singing to the plants: A guide to mestizo shamanism in 
the upper Amazon. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico 
Press; 2009. 
[6] 
Labate BC, Jungaberle H, editors. The internationalization of 
ayahuasca. Zürich: Lit Verlag; 2011. 
[7] 
Tupper KW. The globalization of ayahuasca: Harm reduction or 
benefit maximization? Int J Drug Policy 2008; 19(4): 297-303. 
[8] 
Barbosa PCR, Mizumoto S, Bogenschutz MP, Strassman RJ. 
Health status of ayahuasca users. Drug Testing Analysis 2012; 4(7-
8): 601-9. 
[9] 
Grob 
CS, 
McKenna 
DJ, 
Callaway 
JC, 
et 
al. 
Human 
psychopharmacology of hoasca, a plant hallucinogen used in ritual 
context in Brazil. J Nervous Mental Disease 1996; 184(2): 86-94. 
[10] 
Halpern JH, Sherwood AR, Passie T, Blackwell KC, Ruttenber AJ. 
Evidence of health and safety in American members of a religion 
who use a hallucinogenic sacrament. Med Sci Monitor 2008; 14(8): 
SR15-SR22. 
[11] 
Santos RG, Landeira-Fernandez J, Strassman RJ, Motta V, Cruz 
APM. Effects of ayahuasca on psychometric measures of anxiety, 
panic-like and hopelessness in Santo Daime members. J 
Ethnopharmacol 2007; 112(3): 507-13. 
[12] 
Doering-Silveira E, Lopez E, Grob CS, et al. Ayahuasca in 
adolescence: A neuropsychological assessment. J Psychoactive 
Drugs 2005; 37(2): 123-8. 
[13] 
Fábregas JM, González D, Fondevila S, et al. Assessment of 
addiction severity among ritual users of ayahuasca. Drug Alcohol 
Dependence 2010; 111(3): 257-61. 
[14] 
Gable RS. Risk assessment of ritual use of oral dimethyltryptamine 
(DMT) and harmala alkaloids. Addiction 2007; 102(1): 24-34. 
[15] 
Mabit J. Ayahuasca in the treatment of addictions. In: Winkelman 
MJ, Roberts TB, editors. Psychedelic medicine: New evidence for 
hallucinogenic substances as treatments. Westport, CT: Praeger 
Publishers; 2007. p. 87-105. 
[16] 
Labate BC, Santos RGd, Anderson B, Mercante M, Barbosa PCR. 
The treatment and handling of substance dependence with 
ayahuasca: Reflections on current and future research. In: Labate 
BC, MacRae E, editors. Ayahuasca, ritual and religion in Brazil. 
London: Equinox Publishing; 2010. p 205-27. 
[17] 
Liester MB, Prickett JI. Hypotheses regarding the mechanisms of 
ayahuasca in the treatment of addictions. J Psychoactive Drugs 
2012; 44(3): 200-8. 
[18] 
Bogenschutz MP, Pommy JM. Therapeutic mechanisms of classic 
hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions: From indirect 
evidence to testable hypotheses. Drug Testing Analysis 2012; 4(7-
8): 543-55. 
[19] 
Health Canada. A statistical profile on the health of First Nations in 
Canada: Determinants of health, 1999 to 2003. Ottawa: Health 
Canada, First Nations and Inuit Health Branch; 2009. 
[20] 
MacMillan HL, MacMillan AB, Offord DR, Dingle JL. Aboriginal 
health. Canadian Med Assoc J 1996; 155(11): 1569-78. 
[21] 
Gossop M, Marsden J, Stewart D, Kidd T. The National Treatment 
Outcome Research Study (NTORS): 4-5 year follow-up results. 
Addiction 2003; 98(3): 291-303. 
[22] 
Maté G. In the realm of hungry ghosts: Close encounters with 
addiction. Toronto: Vintage Canada; 2008. 
[23] 
Gratz KL, Roemer L. Multidimensional assessment of emotion 
regulation and dysregulation: Development, factor structure, and 
initial validation of the difficulties in emotion regulation scale. J 
Psychopathol Behavioral Assessment 2004; 26(1): 41-54. 
 


Ayahuasca-Assisted Therapy for Addiction 
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1     41 
[24] 
Jones BT, Corbin W, Fromme K. A review of expectancy theory 
and alcohol consumption. Addiction 2002; 96(1): 57-72. 
[25] 
Werner K, Gross JJ. Emotional regulation and expectancy theory: 
A conceptual framework. In: Kring AM, Sloan DM, editors. 
Emotional regulation and psychopathology: A transdiagnostic 
approach to etiology and treatment. New York: Guilford Press; 
2010. p. 13-37. 
[26] 
Murphy A, Taylor E, Elliott R. The detrimental effects of 
emotional process dysregulation on decision-making in substance 
dependence. Frontiers Integrative Neurosci 2012; 6(101): 1-24. 
[27] 
Azizi A, Borjali A, Golzari M. The effectiveness of emotion 
regulation training and cognitive therapy on the emotional and 
addictional problems of substance abusers. Iranian J Psychiatry 
2010; 5(2): 60-5. 
[28] 
Kun B, Demetrovics Z. Emotional intelligence and addictions: A 
statistic review. Substance Use Misuse 2010; 45(7-8): 1131-60. 
[29] 
Cardaciotto L, Herbert JD, Forman EM, Moitra E, Farrow V. The 
assessment of present-moment awareness and acceptance: The 
Philadelphia Mindfulness Scale. Assessment 2008; 15(2): 204-23. 
[30] 
Hoppes K. The application of mindfulness-based cognitive 
interventions in the treatment of co-occurring addictive and mood 
disorders. CNS Spectrums 2006; 11(11): 829-51. 
[31] 
Greeson JM. Mindfulness research update: 2008. J Evidence-Based 
Complimentary Alternative Med 2008; 14(1): 10-8. 
[32] 
Skanavi S, Laqueille X, Aubin HJ. Mindfulness based interventions 
for addictive disorders: A review. Encephale 2011; 37(5): 379-87. 
[33] 
Bowen S, Chawla N, Collins SE, et al. Mindfulness-based relapse 
prevention for substance use disorders: A pilot efficacy trial. 
Substance Abuse 2009; 30(4): 295-305. 
[34] 
Miller JJ, Fletcher K, Kabat-Zinn J. Three-year follow-up and 
clinical implications of a mindfulness meditation-based stress 
reduction intervention in the treatment of anxiety disorders. 
General Hospital Psychiatry 1995; 17(3): 192-200. 
[35] 
Strosahl KD, Hayes SC, Bergan J, Romano P. Assessing the field 
effectiveness of acceptance and commitment therapy: An example 
of the manipulated training research method. Behavior Therap 
1998; 29(1): 35-63. 
[36] 
Robins CJ, Chapman AL. Dialectical behavior therapy: Current 
status, recent developments, and future directions. J Personality 
Disorders 2004; 18(1): 73-89. 
[37] 
Sipe WE, Eisendrath SJ. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy: 
theory and practice. Canadian J Psychiatry 2012; 57(2): 63-9. 
[38] 
Rogers ES, Chamberlin J, Ellison ML, Crean T. A consumer-
constructed scale to measure empowerment among users of mental 
health services. Psychiatric Services 1997; 48(8): 1042-7. 
[39] 
Wallerstein N, Bernstein E. Empowerment education: Freire's ideas 
adapted to health education. Health Edu Behavior 1988; 15(4): 
379-94. 
[40] 
Fallot RD, Harris M. The Trauma Recovery and Empowerment 
Model (TREM): Conceptual and practical issues in a group 
intervention for women. Community Mental Health J 2002; 38(6): 
475-85. 
[41] 
Berg M, Coman E, Schensul JJ. Youth action research for 
prevention: A multi-level intervention designed to increase efficacy 
and empowerment among urban youth. Am J Community Psychol 
2009; 43(3-4): 345-59. 
[42] 
Aguilera S, Plasencia AV. Culturally appropriate HIV/AIDS and 
substance abuse prevention programs for urban native youth. J 
Psychoactive Drugs 2005; 37(3): 299-304. 
[43] 
Fallot RD, Harris M. Integrated trauma services teams for women 
survivors with alcohol and other drug problems and co-occurring 
mental disorders. Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly 2004; 22(3-4): 
181-99. 
[44] 
Blume AW, Lovato LV. Empowering the disempowered: Harm 
reduction with racial/ethnic minority clients. J Clin Psychol 2009; 
66(2): 189-200. 
[45] 
Harris M. Trauma recovery and empowerment: A clinician's guide 
for working with women in groups. New York: Free Press; 1998. 
[46] 
Rush B, Urbanoski K, Bassani D, et al. Prevalence of co-occurring 
substance use and other mental disorders in the Canadian 
population. Canadian J Psychiatry 2008; 53(12): 800-9. 
[47] 
Woicik PA, Stewart SH, Pihl RO, Conrod PJ. The substance use 
risk profile scale: A scale measuring traits linked to reinforcement-
specific substance use profiles. Addictive Behaviors 2009; 34(12): 
1042-55. 
[48] 
Clarke PB. The relationship between wellness, emotion regulation, 
and relapse in adult outpatient substance abuse clients [Ph.D. 
dissertation]. Greensboro, NC: University of North Carolina; 2012. 
[49] 
Marlatt G, Gordon J. Determinants of relapse: Implications for the 
maintenance of behavior change. In: Davidson PO, Davidson SM, 
editors. Behavioral medicine: Changing health lifestyles. New 
York: Brunner/Mazel; 1980. p. 410-52. 
[50] 
Cohen SR, Mount BM, Bruera E, Provost M, Rowe J, Tong K. 
Validity of the McGill Quality of Life Questionnaire in the 
palliative 
care 
setting: 
A 
multi-centre 
Canadian 
study 
demonstrating the importance of the existential domain Palliative 
Medicine 1997; 11(3): 3-20. 
[51] 
Shanon B. The epistemics of ayahuasca visions. Phenomenol 
Cognitive Sci 2010; 9(2): 263-80. 
[52] 
World Health Organization. The ASSIST project - Alcohol, 
smoking and substance involvement screening test 2010 [updated 
2010; cited]; Available from: http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/ 
activities/assist/en/index.html. 
[53] 
Adlaf EM, Begin P, Sawka E, editors. Canadian Addiction Survey 
(CAS): A national survey of Canadians' use of alcohol and other 
drugs: Prevalence of use and related harms—detailed report. 
Ottawa: Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse; 2005. 
[54] 
Humeniuk R, Ali R, Babor TF, et al. Validation of the alcohol, 
smoking and substance involvement screening test (ASSIST). 
Addiction 2008; 103(6): 1039-47. 
[55] 
Field A. Discovering statistics using SPSS. 2nd ed. London: Sage 
Publishing; 2005. 
[56] 
Jilek WG. Indian healing: Shamanic ceremonialism in the Pacific 
Northwest. Surrey, BC: Hancock House; 1982. 
[57] 
Fotiou E. Working with “la medicina”: Elements of healing in 
contemporary ayahuasca rituals. Anthropol Consciousness 2012; 
23(1): 6-27. 
[58] 
Prochaska JO, Velicer WF, Rossi JS, et al. Stages of change and 
decisional balance for 12 problem behaviors. Health Psychol 1994; 
13(1): 39-46. 
[59] 
Halpern JH, Sherwood AR, Hudson JI, Yurgelun-Todd D, Pope 
HG. Psychological and cognitive effects of long-term peyote use 
among Native Americans. Biological Psychiatry 2005; 58(8): 624-
31. 
[60] 
Albaugh BJ, Anderson PO. Peyote in the treatment of alcoholism 
among American Indians. Am J Psychiatry 1974; 131(11): 1247-
50. 
[61] 
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin can 
occasion mystical-type experiences having substantial and 
sustained 
personal 
meaning 
and 
spiritual 
significance. 
Psychopharmacology 2006; 187(3): 268-83. 
[62] 
Griffiths R, Richards W, Johnson M, McCann U, Jesse R. 
Mystical-type experiences occasioned by psilocybin mediate the 
attribution of personal meaning and spiritual significance 14 
months later. J Psychopharmacol 2008; 22(6): 621-32. 
[63] 
Krebs TS, Johansen PØ. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for 
alcoholism: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J 
Psychopharmacol 2012; 26(7): 994-1002. 
[64] 
Winkelman MJ, Roberts TB, editors. Psychedelic medicine: New 
evidence for hallucinogenic substances as treatments. Westport, 
CT: Praeger Publishers; 2007. 
[65] 
MacLean KA, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Mystical experiences 
occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocybin lead to increases in the 
personality domain of openness. J Psychopharmacol 2011; 25(11): 
1453-61. 
[66] 
Callaway JC. Various alkaloid profiles in decoctions of 
Banisteriopsis caapi. J Psychoactive Drugs 2005; 37(2): 151-5. 
[67] 
Callaway JC, Brito GS, Neves ES. Phytochemical analyses of 
Banisteriopsis caapi and Psychotria viridis. J Psychoactive Drugs 
2005; 37(2): 145-50. 
[68] 
Tupper KW. Ayahuasca, entheogenic education & public policy 
[Ph.D. dissertation]. Vancouver: University of British Columbia; 
2011. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.kentupper.com/resources/Ayahuasca+Entheogenic+Ed
uc+$26+Public+Policy+-+Tupper+2011.pdf 
[69] 
Office of Controlled Substances. Exemption under Section 56 of 
the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (Public Interest) 
Regarding the Use of Daime Tea for Religious Purposes. Ottawa: 
Health 
Canada; 
February 
2008; 
Available 
from:  
http://www.bialabate.net/wp-


42     Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2013, Vol. 6, No. 1 
Thomas et al. 
content/uploads/2008/08/Santo_Daime_Exemption_Health_Canada
_IAS_2008.pdf 
[70] 
Posner M. B.C. doctor agrees to stop using Amazonian plant to 
treat 
addictions. 
November 
9, 
2011; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/health/new-health/health-
news/bc-doctor-agrees-to-stop-using-amazonian-plant-to-treat-
addictions/article2231413/. 
[71] 
Aglukkaq L. Letter to Dr. J. Rochester. Ottawa; October 23, 2012; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.bialabate.net/wp-
content/uploads/2008/08/CeudoMontreal_HC-Response-Letter-23-
Oct-2012-2.pdf 

 
Received: January 16, 2013 
Revised: January 31, 2013 
Accepted: February 8, 2013 
 
